Regine Velasquez (; born Regina Encarnacion Ansong Velasquez; April 22, 1970) is a Filipino singer, actress and record producer. She gained recognition by winning both the 1984 Ang Bagong Kampeon and the 1989 Asia-Pacific Song Contest where she represented the Philippines. Velasquez rose to fame with the release of "Kung Maibabalik Ko Lang" from her eponymous debut album. The album was generally well-received and spawned notable singles, "Urong Sulong" and "Isang Lahi", that established her as a commercially viable Filipino pop artist.
Velasquez signed a recording contract with Polygram Records in 1994 and subsequently released Listen Without Prejudice, marking her debut as an up-and-coming artist in the Southeast and East Asian region. The album became her best-selling record in the region to date and produced "In Love With You", which became her most successful single of the 1990s and its accompanying music video was later named "Video of the Decade" by MTV Asia. Velasquez parted with Polygram in 1997, citing lack of creative control for her music and public image, and signed a record deal with VIVA Records the following year. Following her decision to resume her music career in the Philippines, Velasquez took further creative freedom by becoming the executive producer of R2K (1999). The album became the best-selling album by a female artist in the Philippines and the best-selling local album in 1999 to 2000.
After a significant period in music, Velasquez ventured into film with a decently received lead role in Wanted Perfect Mother (1996), she continued to play female lead roles in romantic comedy films – including Kailangan Ko'y Ikaw (2000) and Pangako Ikaw Lang (2001), with the latter being the highest-grossing film in 2001. She also had success in television with the shows Maalaala Mo Kaya (2002), Forever In My Heart (2004), Diva (2010) and Poor Señorita (2016). In the first of these she appeared in a featured episode portraying a mentally challenged woman, later earning her first lead acting award for television, while the other three featured her in lead roles for primetime television.
Throughout her career, Velasquez has sold more than 8.5 million records regionally. According to the PARI, she is the best-selling artist of all time in the Philippines, with 7 million certified albums domestically and a further 1.5 million in Southeast and East Asia. With the release of Covers, Vol. 1 (2004), Velasquez gained her eighth album to have exceeded 200,000 units in sales, more than any other solo artist in the Philippines. Aside from her commercial success, Velasquez has won an Asian Television Award, 2 MTV Asia Awards, 18 Box Office Entertainment Awards, 16 Awit Awards, 12 Aliw Awards, and 5 Star Awards for Music and has been consistently credited with inspiring a generation of Filipino singers. Referred to as "Asia's songbird", she is regarded for her vocal range, agility and signature use of the belting technique.


