Tan Suee Chieh (simplified Chinese: 陈诸杰; traditional Chinese: 陳諸傑; pinyin: Chén Zhū Jié) was appointed the Group Chief Executive at NTUC Enterprise on 1 October 2013. He is the father of two children, a boy and an elder girl, at the ages of 9 and 12 respectively.
NTUC Enterprise, set up in July 2012, is the holding co-operative of the existing group of NTUC co-operatives including NTUC Fairprice, NTUC Income, NTUC First Campus, NTUC FoodFare, NTUC Unity Healthcare, NTUC Eldercare and NTUC Learning Hub. As at 2012, the organisations collectively employ 14, 000 staff, serve 2 million customers and record a combined annual revenue of $8 billion. NTUC Enterprise is the single largest shareholder of each of the NTUC social enterprises.
NTUC Enterprise’s main objective is to enable the NTUC social enterprises to achieve significant scale in order to meet the needs of Singaporeans for affordable and quality products and services. These include insurance, investments and retirement planning; child care and early education; training for workers and professionals; healthcare and pharmacies; long term care for the elderly; supermarkets; and the provision of food at food courts, hawker centres, coffee shops and through catering.
Previously Tan Suee Chieh was Chief Executive of NTUC Income Insurance Co-operative Limited in Singapore from February 2007 to September 2013. He has served as a member of the organisation’s Board of Directors since 2003. Prior to that, he held the position of President, Asia Pacific Region of the SHL Group plc, a British human resource consultancy firm and a world leader in objective assessment and psychometric instruments. From 1981 to 2001, he was with the Prudential plc and held several senior positions including the Company Actuary of Prudential Malaysia, Chief Executive of Prudential Singapore and Managing Director, Established Markets of Prudential Asia.
Tan Suee Chieh’s directorships include International Cooperative and Mutual Insurance Federation and Allnations Board. Tan Suee Chieh is also the Co-chairman of the Institute of Service Excellence@SMU, Vice Chairman of the Singapore Children’s Society Executive Committee, a member of the Board of Governors of the Asia Pacific Risk and Insurance Association, Advisory Board Member of the Centre for Strategic Leadership at National University of Singapore and Sim Kee Boon Institute for Financial Economics at Singapore Management University, and Trustee of the Singapore London School of Economics (LSE) Trust.
He is a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society and Institute of Actuaries, and was a Past President of the Life Insurance Association of Singapore as well as the Actuarial Society of Malaysia. Tan Suee Chieh has a first class honours degree from the London School of Economics, and a master's degree in Social Organizational Psychology from Columbia University, New York.
In 2013, Tan Suee Chieh was the recipient of Singapore Business Award’s Outstanding CEO of the Year, the Ruth Wong Award from the Singapore Children's Society, the Friend of Labour Award from Singapore’s National Trades Union Congress, and the Lifetime Achievement Award conferred by the Institute of Advertising Singapore  in 2012. Tan Suee Chieh was also named in the Prestige Singapore List 2013.
