Matthew L. Scullin is a San Francisco-based scientist, energy entrepreneur, and musician.
He is currently the CEO of Hayward, California based Alphabet Energy, which he co-founded in 2008 with Peidong Yang. Alphabet Energy is the first company to manufacture silicon thermoelectric devices and deploy commercial thermoelectric waste heat recovery systems.
In 2013, Alphabet Energy was named a Technology Pioneer by the World Economic Forum. Scullin received the company's recognition at a ceremony in China in September 2013 and subsequently attended the World Economic Forum in Davos in January 2014. Alphabet Energy has previously won the Cleantech Open's People's Choice, National Runner Up, California Sustainability, and California Finalist awards. The company has also won awards from Opportunity Green and R&D100, and is backed by leading investors in the field of clean energy technology including TPG, Claremont Creek Ventures, and CalCEF. For his pioneering work in the field of alternative energy, Scullin was named to the Forbes list of "30 Under 30" in 2012.
Scullin was born and raised in the Alphabet City neighborhood of Manhattan, where he attended the United Nations International School. He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania magna cum laude, where he won the R.M. Brick Award in Materials Science, and then went on to complete his Ph.D. in Materials Science at the University of California, Berkeley with adviser Arun Majumdar. He is the author of several peer-reviewed publications and patents, and has lectured about cleantech and entrepreneurship at universities or labs including the Kellogg School of Management, Haas School of Business, HEC Paris, University of Pennsylvania, Stanford, and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. He has also authored work on natural resources, including an analysis of the element Tellurium.
Most of Scullin's work relates to ideas in crystallography and symmetry. In 2007 Scullin collaborated with architects Aranda\Lasch on a commissioned piece entitled "Rules of Six" for the exhibit Design and the Elastic Mind at the MoMA in New York. Since then Scullin has shown individual work.
He is also a DJ and musician, and has performed with and DJed for M.I.A. and BC Kingdom.
