A thermodynamic system is the material and radiative content of a macroscopic volume in space, that can be adequately described by thermodynamic state variables such as temperature, entropy, internal energy and pressure. Usually, by default, a thermodynamic system is taken to be in its own internal state of thermodynamic equilibrium, as opposed to a non-equilibrium state. The thermodynamic system is always enclosed by walls that separate it from its surroundings; these constrain the system. A thermodynamic system is subject to external interventions called thermodynamic operations; these alter the system's walls or its surroundings; as a result, the system undergoes thermodynamic processes according to the principles of thermodynamics. (This account mainly refers to the simplest kind of thermodynamic system; compositions of simple systems may also be considered.)
The thermodynamic state of a thermodynamic system is its internal state as specified by its state variables. In addition to the state variables, a thermodynamic account also requires a special kind of quantity called a state function, which is a function of the defining state variables. For example, if the state variables are internal energy, volume and mole amounts, that special function is the entropy. These quantities are inter-related by one or more functional relationships called equations of state, and by the system's characteristic equation. Thermodynamics imposes restrictions on the possible equations of state and on the characteristic equation. The restrictions are imposed by the laws of thermodynamics.
According to the permeabilities of the walls of a system, transfers of energy and matter occur between it and its surroundings, which are assumed to be unchanging over time, until a state of thermodynamic equilibrium is attained. The only states considered in equilibrium thermodynamics are equilibrium states. Classical thermodynamics includes equilibrium thermodynamics. It also considers: (a) systems considered in terms of cyclic sequences of processes rather than of states of the system; such were historically important in the conceptual development of the subject; and (b) systems considered in terms of processes described by steady flows; such are important in engineering.
In 1824 Sadi Carnot described a thermodynamic system as the working substance (such as the volume of steam) of any heat engine under study. The very existence of such thermodynamic systems may be considered a fundamental postulate of equilibrium thermodynamics, though it is only rarely cited as a numbered law. According to Bailyn, the commonly rehearsed statement of the zeroth law of thermodynamics is a consequence of this fundamental postulate.
In equilibrium thermodynamics the state variables do not include fluxes because in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium all fluxes have zero values by postulation. Equilibrium thermodynamic processes may of course involve fluxes but these must have ceased by the time a thermodynamic process or operation is complete bringing a system to its eventual thermodynamic state. Non-equilibrium thermodynamics allows its state variables to include non-zero fluxes, that describe transfers of matter or energy or entropy between a system and its surroundings.
