Credit card balance transfer is the transfer of a balance (the amount owed) on a credit card account to an account held at another credit card company.
This process is actively encouraged by almost all credit card issuers as a mean to attract new customers. Such an arrangement is attractive to the consumer because the new bank or credit card issuer will offer incentives such as a low interest or interest-free period, loyalty points, or another combination of incentives.
An order of payments for every credit card specifies which balance(s) will be paid first. In nearly all cases, payments apply to lowest-rate balances first, then to highest-rate balances last. (Some countries, like Australia and Germany, require payments to be applied to the highest-rate balance first.) Any balance under a teaser rate or fixed rate will be paid off sooner than any purchases or cash advances, which usually have the highest rate. By avoiding making purchases or taking cash advances altogether, the borrower can ensure they maintain the full benefits of the original balance transfer.
The process is extremely fast and can be concluded within a matter of hours in some cases. Automated services exist to help facilitate such balance transfers. Other similar services do exist, but they may not be free to use.
Decisions on whether or not a cardholder decides to transfer one's credit card balance can depend on a combination of three things:
1) Interest rate of the new bank or credit card issuer: The lower this rate, the better for the consumer and the worse for the credit card company. The transferred balance will be subject to the same rate as card's purchase rate. The same terms will apply to purchases that may be interest-free until the payment date for the statement on which the transfer appears. More often such transferred balances move immediately to the full purchase rate. Credit card balances involving the transfer of funds from a high credit card or a store card to a low- or zero-APR credit card will result in a reduction in monthly bill for the cardholder.
For example, A is an especially low rate that a credit card company offers to new customers to entice them to transfer their balance. It is a lure for catching new customers. With an extra low initial rate, transferring customers have lower than normal which ultimately means lower initial monthly outflows of money to the credit card company. The 0% rate is the most common when a new credit card account is opened.
This teaser rate is temporary. The duration of teaser rates varies (typically) from 6 to 15 months, after which the remaining transferred balance is subject to purchase rate. Teaser rates in the UK are generally longer than in North America, with (typically) 6 to 35 months available for UK balance transfers. Failure to ensure the account is current (payments made on time) may result in the withdrawal of the offer rate. Customers should pay attention to the length of time of the opening offer, since once it is over there is a sudden increase in rates. This increase is the credit card company's method of making extra profits to make up for the losses of charging the lower introductory rate. Of course, this can be countered by switching to yet another credit card company and its apps.
A low rate is fixed until the transferred balance is paid in full. This type of offer is usually guaranteed only as long as the account is current (see Teaser rate). Whilst this allows the borrower to save interest on their existing debts without the need to initiate further balance transfers once a teaser rate offer expires, the fixed offer rate is higher than the limited duration teaser rate offer. (Typically, it may be between one-half and two-thirds of a fixed rate, fixed term personal loan)
