Marc J. Lane (born 30 August 1946) is a business, trust, estate, and tax attorney, Master Registered Financial Planner, Registered Financial Counselor, and Certified Investment Specialist. By appointment of Illinois Governor Pat Quinn, Lane served as Chairman of the State of Illinois' Task Force on Social Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and Enterprise, and by appointment of Cook County Commissioner Jesus “Chuy” Garcia, now serves as Vice Chairperson of the Cook County Commission on Social Innovation. He designed and taught the Social Enterprise course as an adjunct Professor of Law at his alma mater, Northwestern University School of Law, and has also served as an adjunct Professor of Business in the MBA program at the University of Illinois-Chicago College of Business Administration's Institute for Entrepreneurial Studies. Lane is the author of thirty-five books on corporate organization, management, taxation, investment, personal finance and social enterprise. Out of his proprietary research, he developed a new socially responsible investing approach, Advocacy Investing, which allows investors to positively express their values on corporate behavior issues such as social justice and the environment through stock selection—without sacrificing portfolio diversification or long-term performance. Lane drafted the Illinois legislation to create an entity called the Low-Profit Limited Liability Company (L3C), a new hybrid structure intended for use by for-profit ventures that have a primary goal of achieving a socially beneficial purpose. The law was signed by Gov. Pat Quinn on 4 August 2009, and took effect on 1 January 2010. Lane continues to support economic growth in Illinois and was the recipient of the Independent Voters of Illinois-Independent Precinct Organization's 2016 "Legal Eagle" Award. Marc Lane's 34th book, Social Enterprise: Empowering Mission-Driven Entrepreneurs, was published in 2011  and his 35th book, "The Mission-Driven Venture: Business Solutions to the World's Most Vexing Social Problems," was published in 2015 and was nominated by the Alliance for Nonprofit Management for the 2016 Terry McAdam Book Award which recognizes new publications in the nonprofit sector that effectively inspire, connect ideas and share new practices. In "The Mission-Driven Venture: Business Solutions to the World's Most Vexing Social Problems," Lane highlights personal stories of individuals that chose to deal with a social issue using business principles, and the impediments that they overcame through the use of legal and strategic tactics.
