Kalangi Nathar was the guru of Bhogar (or Bhogarnathar). Kalangi Nathar was from Benaras. Kalangi Nathar and Bogar were considered to possess an ideal master and student relationship. It is said that they had a mutual care among both of them in their own spiritual progresses. Kalangi Nathar, especially took more care and strain towards the spiritual advancement of his disciple bogar. Kalangi Nathar was behind Bogar's every development and his innovations for the world.
He is often referred to us Kanjamalai Siddhar. The word "kanjam" stands for the following meaning — gold, copper and Iron and malai means hill. It is said that Paranthaka Chozha who built Sri Nataraja temple with golden roof, took the gold from this hill. Also the water falls seen in this hill is called "Ponni Nadhi".
He is the disciple to the great siddha Thirumoolar. He is one among the seven disciples whom Thirumoolar transcended his knowledge, the other six being Indran, Soman, Rudhran, Kanduru, Brahman, and Kanjamalaiyan.
The shrine of Kalangi Nathar is found in a small village in Salem, Tamil Nadu. This village is 12 km away from Salem City. This place is in via route to Ilampillai.
He is supposed to have attained Samadhi in this place several hundred years ago.
Kalanginathar is Boghar's father according to Boghar's poem. Boghar glorifies Kalanginathar in many of his verses.
Kalanginathar is said to be the primary disciple of Thirumoolar Sithar, He went on to China by the use of a tablet, and attained mukthi (immortal status) in Kanchipupram. His jeeva samadhi is found in Kanchipuram district of Tamil Nadu. He has a very special temple in Sivadhapauram to Ellampillai, which is called as Sithar Koil in the same area. It is situated at the grounds of Kanjamalai. This temple is associated with a Kali temple in the left and Murugan in the upstairs respectively.
The following information is available about Sri Kamalamuni in the book Bogar 7000 written by siddhar Bogar. Song 5729: Kamalamuni was born on the Tamil month of Vaikasi (May — June), his birth star being 2nd part of Poosam. Song 5725: The siddhar named Kamalamuni belongs to Kuravar caste. He lived for six-eight generations. Song 5841: Kamalamuni is 4000 years and some 300 odd (days) old. He lived in China for a long time.
However, siddhar Karuvoorar in his book Vadha Kaviyam (Song 584) says that "Maamuni" belongs to "Kannar" caste. He does not explicitly say "Kamalamuni", but mentions "Maamuni". It is not known whether Karuvoorar refers to Kamalamuni or not.
Sri Kalangi Nadhar belongs to Kannar caste. Many people believe that Sri Kalangi Nathar is siddhar Kamalamuni. In the 63rd song of Kamalamuni Suthiram 76, a line says that 'Kamalamuni alias Kalangi". Hence it may be true that Sri Kalangi Nathar is siddhar Kamalamuni himself.
In Bogar Janana Sasthra, it is mentioned that Kamalamuni attained samadhi at Madurai. It is believed that siddhar Kamalamuni attained samadhi at Thiruvavur.
Kalangi Nathar was an Indian ascetic who had gone to China. Kalangi Nathar belongs to both Nath tradition of Northern India and also the Siddha tradition of Southern India. Kalangi Nathar is associated with Kaanja Malai in South India and later migrated and lived in China and spread the knowledge of yoga and Varma-Kalai (acupuncture) to the Chinese people. In China he is called Confucius. Kalangi Nathar decided to go into Samadhi for a very long time (for about 5000-years), and called Bogar to come to China to continue his mission. According to Chinese tradition, Laozi lived in the 6th century BC, however many historians contend that Laozi actually lived in the 4th century BC, which was the period of Hundred Schools of Thought and Warring States Period, whereas Confucius was born in 551 BCE in Lu, a small state in China and died in 479 BCE (as per Chinese sources). This shows that Confucius was elder to Laozi. Bhoganathar who is called Laozi/Lao Tzu in China, was the successor of Kalangi Nathar (Confucius).
