Nick Rosen is an author, campaigner and award-winning documentary film-maker. His book Off the Grid: Inside the Movement for More Space, Less Government, and True Independence in Modern America is published by Penguin Books and was released July 27, 2010.
His series of short films about Chinese Billionaires went out on BBC World, and is on the BBC web site at bbc.com/oneinabillion
His book How To Live Off-Grid, published by Doubleday June 2007, is a guide to escaping the rat race; part of an ecological campaign to change the rules on planning permission via his website Off-Grid.net started in 1996.
He is now making a documentary series based on both the books, featuring off-grid households around the US and the UK. To cover all the practical issue and bring inspiring stories from ordinary people.
In the early nineties, Nick became a freelance journalist, primarily writing for The Times and The Guardian. It was during this period that he met Katharine Hamnett and co-founded the short lived eco magazine TOMORROW.
In 1992, Rosen formed a TV production company, Vivum, and began to make documentaries for the ITV First Tuesday series. In 1992-3 he produced Brezhnev's Daughter, a documentary about the way the Nomenklatura were coming to terms with the new order in Russia. It won Best International Production prize at the NY Film and TV Festival.
Rosen wrote "The Durlacher Report" which became the base document in many of the early Internet IPOs, such as Demon, Pipex and Easynet, and followed this with The Net-Head Handbook, a satire about the dawning of the internet.
In 2004, Rosen produced Sacred Ground, the fight for Ground Zero, for PBS and Channel 4 – a film about the battle to build a meaningful memorial at Ground Zero, and in 2006 he produced Britain’s Commuter Nightmare, a one-hour documentary for Channel 4 Dispatches.
His other ventures as start-ups was Online Research Agency which in its short life produced one considerable work "Business.eu" - a report focused on online business in Europe. Online Research Agency was wound up in an orderly manner in 2001.
In 1999 he met his wife, Turner nominated artist Fiona Banner. They married in 2005 and have a young daughter.
He is the son of scientist Dennis Rosen.
