The Madras Bulls or MadBulls is an informal motorcycling club based in Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India. The club was founded in April 2002, with the focus on the Royal Enfield Bullet series of motorcycles. The club came to being in April, 2002, with a passion towards the Royal Enfield Bullet with the tag line "To Hell with you, To Heaven with Us".
The Madras Bulls are part of BOBMC - Brotherhood of Bulleters Motorcycling Consortium. Initially started with 7 passionate bikers in 2002, the club has now grown to 121 Madbulls( Main group members) and about 1120 members (as of Feb 2017) in the announce group. The Madbulls ride the Bullet series of motorcycles from the Royal Enfield stable that includes the 350cc(all variants), 500cc(all variants), 535cc(all variants), GT and Himalayan.
Safety on the highway is of keen importance and strong emphasis is given on any ride. All riders are expected to ride with a full face helmet, jackets, shoes, riding pants and gloves. The MadBulls do not encourage neither participate in street races nor reckless riding. The MadBulls actively participate in track events hosted at the Madras Motorcycling Club in Sriperambathur, Chennai and also in impromptu off-road morning rides. Again, safety and adherence to rules is clearly emphasized during these events. On the highway, one can spot the MadBulls riding in a staggered formation with their lights on.
The MadBulls meet every second Sunday of the month at Cafe Coffee Day, Beasant Nagar, Chennai at 8 :00 AM. The meeting allows introduction and interaction between members and an opportunity for the announce group to meet with the main group members. Official announcements, ride plans, upcoming rides and events are some of the highlights of the monthly meetings. One of the requisites to become a MadBull is attending these monthly meets as this gives a chance for members to know each other and also a forum to communicate and express interest.
Though there are several rides scheduled in a calendar year, the most prominent and widely attended is the Rider Mania scheduled during the third weekend of January every year. The Madbulls recently returned from Kundapura, in Northern Karnataka where the Southern Squadron hosted the 2017 Rider Mania that had over 1200 Riders participating from different parts of the country. Some of the rides that have permanently etched memories in every MadBull are the day rides to Pondy, TADA, Biriyani rides to Ambur, Chai runs to Vaniyambadi, Night runs to Sulurpet for Idli and so on.
The Madras Bulls have hosted two Rider Mania's or RM's in the fifteen years of existence. The first RM was hosted in 2006 at Casurina Bay, ECR - Chennai where ~350 riders had ridden to meet with the brotherhood. The Madbulls hosted one of the largest RM's in 2014 at Indecco Beach Resort, ECR - Chennai where more than 1100 riders came together to be part of the brotherhood, soak up the sun and to enjoy the beach.
The Madras Bulls Motorcycling Club is proud to be riding together for Fifteen years. Over this period, the club has seen many phases but has remained as one.


