The National Cyber Security Alliance (NCSA), a 501c(3) nonprofit founded in 2001, is the United States' leading public-private partnership promoting cybersecurity and privacy education and awareness. Recognizing that securing our online lives is a shared responsibility, NCSA works to educate and empower our global digital society to use the internet safely and securely. NCSA coalesces the efforts of the private sector, government and NGOs to engage in far-reaching cybersecurity awareness efforts and brings together divergent groups in collaborative ways to encourage a culture of cybersecurity and privacy.
NCSA's primary partners are the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and NCSA's Board of Directors, which includes representatives from ADP; Aetna; AT&T Services, Inc.; Bank of America; Barclays; CDK Global; Cisco; Comcast; ESET North America; Facebook; Google; Intel; LifeLock; Logical Operations; Mastercard, Microsoft Corporation; NXP Semiconductors; PayPal; PKWARE; RSA, the Security Division of EMC; Raytheon; SANS Institute; Symantec; TeleSign; Verizon; Visa; and Wells Fargo.
NCSA's core initiatives include the following: National Cyber Security Awareness Month, co-led by NCSA and DHS, provides a platform for industry, government, nonprofits, schools and the public to raise awareness about using the internet and connected devices more safely and securely. NCSA partners with DHS to provide the resources and leadership for the initiative. The official hashtag for the month is #CyberAware. Data Privacy Day, held annually on January 28, began in the United States and Canada in January 2008 as an extension of Data Protection Day celebrated in the European Union. The theme for the day is “Respecting Privacy, Safeguarding Data and Enabling Trust.” The signature event of the year-round data privacy campaign, Data Privacy Day, relies on the broad participation of stakeholders to educate and generate awareness about privacy and data protection through NCSA’s free materials and resources. More than 660 organizations and individuals signed up as Champions to support the day in 2017. The official hashtag for the campaign is #PrivacyAware. STOP. THINK. CONNECT.™ is the year-round global online safety awareness campaign to help all digital citizens stay safer and more secure online. The research-based messaging was created in 2009 by an unprecedented coalition of private companies, nonprofits and government with leadership provided by NCSA and the Anti-Phishing Working Group (APWG). DHS provides the federal government's leadership for the campaign. In addition to the original 25 founding companies, more than 680 companies, nonprofit organizations and government entities are official STOP. THINK. CONNECT.™ partners.
