In hydrology, routing is a technique used to predict the changes in shape of a hydrograph as water moves through a river channel or a reservoir. In flood forecasting, hydrologists may want to know how a short burst of intense rain in an area upstream of a city will change as it reaches the city. Routing can be used to determine whether the pulse of rain reaches the city as a deluge or a trickle.
Routing also can be used to predict the hydrograph shape (and thus lowland flooding potential) subsequent to multiple rainfall events in different sub-catchments of the watershed. Timing and duration of the rainfall events, as well as factors such as antecedent moisture conditions, overall watershed shape, along with subcatchment-area shapes, land slopes (topography/physiography), geology/hydrogeology (i.e. forests and aquifers can serve as giant sponges that absorb rainfall and slowly release it over subsequent weeks and months), and stream-reach lengths all play a role here. The result can be an additive effect (i.e. a large flood if each subcatchment's respective hydrograph peak arrives at the watershed mouth at the same point in time, thereby effectively causing a "stacking" of the hydrograph peaks), or a more distributed-in-time effect (i.e. a lengthy but relatively modest flood, effectively attenuated in time, as the individual subcatchment peaks arrive at the mouth of the main watershed channel in orderly succession).  
Other uses of routing include reservoir and channel design, floodplain studies and watershed simulations.
If the water flow at a particular point, A, in a stream is measured over time with a flow gauge, this information can be used to create a hydrograph. A short period of intense rain, normally called a flood event, can cause a bulge in the graph, as the increased water travels down the river, reaches the flow gauge at A, and passes along it. If another flow gauge at B, downstream of A is set up, one would expect the graph's bulge (or floodwave) to have the same shape. However, the shape of the river and flow resistance within a river (from the river bed, for example) can affect the shape of the floodwave. Oftentimes, the floodwave will be attenuated (have a reduced peak flow).
Routing techniques can be broadly classified as hydraulic (or distributed) routing, hydrologic (or lumped) routing or semi-distributed routing. In general, based on the available field data and goals of the project, one of routing procedures is selected.
