China has long been a cradle and host to a variety of the most enduring religio-philosophical traditions of the world. Confucianism and Taoism, later joined by Buddhism, constitute the "three teachings" that have shapen Chinese culture. There are no clear boundaries between these intertwined religious systems, which do not claim to be exclusive, and elements of each enrich popular or folk religion. The emperors of China claimed the Mandate of Heaven and participated in Chinese religious practices. In the early twentieth-century, reform-minded officials and intellectuals attacked all religions as "superstitious," and since 1949, China has been governed by the Communist Party of China, an atheist institution that prohibits party members from practicing religion while in office. The government placed religious movements and institutions under government control, then during the Cultural Revolution (1966-1976) suppressed them with active antireligious campaigns. Under following leaders, religious organisations were given more autonomy. The government formally recognises five religions: Buddhism, Taoism, Islam, Protestantism, and Catholicism (though the Chinese Catholic Church is independent of the Catholic Church in Rome). In the early twenty-first century there has been increasing official recognition of Confucianism and Chinese folk religion as part of China's cultural inheritance.
Folk or popular religion, the most widespread system of beliefs and practices, has evolved and adapted since at least the Shang and Zhou dynasties in the second millennium BCE. During this Axial Age fundamental elements of a theology and spiritual explanation for the nature of the universe emerged. Basically, this set of beliefs involves allegiance to the shen, often translated as "spirits," but actually a broad category that includes a variety of gods and immortals. These can be deities of the natural environment or ancestral principles of human groups, concepts of civility, culture heroes, many of whom feature in Chinese mythology and history. Confucian philosophy and religious practice began their long evolution during the later Zhou; Taoist institutionalised religions developed by the Han dynasty; Chinese Buddhism became widely popular by the Tang dynasty, and in response Confucian thinkers developed Neo-Confucian philosophies; and sects and local cults thrived. Christianity in China appeared in the 7th century, but did not take root until it was reintroduced in the 16th century by Jesuit missionaries. In the early 20th century Christian communities grew, but after 1949, foreign missionaries were expelled, and churches brought under the Three-Self Patriotic Movement. After the late 1970s, religious freedoms for Christians improved and new Chinese groups emerged. China is also often considered a home to humanist and secularist, this-worldly thought beginning in the time of Confucius.
Because many, perhaps most, Han Chinese do not consider their spiritual beliefs and practices to be a "religion" and in any case do not feel that they must practice any one of them exclusively, it is difficult to gather clear and reliable statistics. National surveys conducted in the early 21st century estimated that some 80% of Han Chinese, that is more than a billion people, practice some kind of Chinese folk religion or Taoism; 10–16% are Buddhists; 2–3% are Christians; and 1–2% are Muslims. Folk religious sects constitute 2–3% to 13% of the population, while some intellectuals espouse Confucianism as a religious self-designation. In addition, ethnic minority groups practice distinctive religions, including Tibetan Buddhism and Islam among the Hui and Uyghur peoples.
