Dimethandrolone undecanoate (DMAU) (developmental code name CDB-4521), or dimethandrolone undecylate, also known as 7α,11β-dimethyl-19-nortestosterone 17β-undecanoate, is a synthetic and orally active anabolic–androgenic steroid (AAS) and a derivative of nandrolone (19-nortestosterone) which was developed by the Contraceptive Development Branch (CDB) of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development and has not been marketed for medical use at this time. It is an androgen ester – specifically, the C17β undecanoate ester of dimethandrolone (7α,11β-dimethyl-19-nortestosterone) – and acts as a prodrug of dimethandrolone in the body. DMAU is or was under development as a potential male contraceptive.
A pharmacokinetic study of DMAU in men found that only 2 to 3% of the drug was hydrolyzed into dimethandrolone when it was administered orally in the form of powder in capsules. In contrast, hydrolysis of testosterone undecanoate into testosterone is rapid and appears to be complete. The difference in conversion efficiency with DMAU relative to testosterone undecanoate is attributed to steric hindrance in DMAU caused by its additional C7α and C11β methyl groups. Although the hydrolysis of DMAU into dimethandrolone was very limited, it was still sufficient to produce dose-dependent biological effects at the dosages assessed, including reversible suppression of luteinizing hormone (LH) and testosterone levels. A subsequent pharmacokinetic study found that the conversion of DMAU into dimethandrolone was improved when the drug was delivered orally in castor oil/benzyl benzoate or a self-emulsifying drug delivery system contained in capsules as opposed to powder in capsules.
Unlike testosterone but similarly to 17α-alkyated AAS like methyltestosterone (17α-methyltestosterone), DMAU has been found to produce some effects indicative of potential hepatotoxicity when it was administered orally to animals. However, it is noteworthy that the effects were significantly less than those of methyltestosterone. Both DMAU and trestolone (7α-methyl-19-nortestosterone; MENT) showed potential signs of hepatotoxicity whereas 11β-methyl-19-nortestosterone 17β-dodecylcarbonate (11β-MNTDC) showed few to no such effects, suggesting that the C7α methyl group of DMAU and trestolone could be an important contributing factor to their hepatotoxic potential.
