HSV- 6613 Ocean surveillance ship named Giao su, Vien si Tran Dai Nghia is a steel vessel designed by the Damen Group (Netherlands) and constructed at the Song Thu Corporation (Vietnam), contributing to overcoming the lack of equipment for research, survey, surveying the sea, all set chart warning waters of Vietnam, creating favorable conditions for exploration, exploitation, management and protection of marine resources.
HSV- 6613 Ocean surveillance ship was started building in July, 2008 and launched in October, 2010 by the Song Thu Corporation, following the design of the Dutch Damen Group, meeting all demands set by the Vietnam Register and Lloyd's Register Group as well as the latest international maritime conventions. Until this time using the training ship and sea-level testing that is done military service.
Before inaugurated and put into operation, Tran Dai Nghia ship has undergone all four phases meet test requirements in design, schedule and quality. This type of steel hull ships, unrestricted activity level, consistent with hydrographic features survey and marine survey measurements meet standards and regulations for decentralization of shipbuilding steel shell of TCVN 6259/2003 Vietnam Register, Lloyd Register, as well as conventions and other regulations related to the survey ship, surveying the sea,... The vessel line shape and drive systems for adaptive purposes, can be easily rotated even in narrow waters, storm strength on level 12. With four diesel engines and 5,000 nautical miles operating range, the Tran Dai Nghia ship can operate continuously over 60 days and nights.
HSV- 6613 Ocean surveillance ship was delivered to Vietnam People's Navy to use for research, survey, mapping panoramic sea areas of Vietnam to contribute to creating favorable conditions for the exploration operation, management and protection of Vietnam's marine resources. In addition, HSV- 6613 Ocean surveillance ship (Tran Dai Nghia ship) also contribute to the development of marine economy, maintaining maritime security and defense, are required to meet the marine strategy to 2020.
This ship named after Professor, Major General Tran Dai Nghia (1913 - 1997), Hero of Vietnam's military technology.
