Jean-Charles Diener is a French national originated from the Brittany region in France. With a master's degree of Agronomy specialized in Aquaculture obtained at the CIRAD of Montpellier, Diener developed a farming of Tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) in Gabon, Africa inside the Parc de la Lékédi with SODEPAL (COMILOG Cableway). In the Philippines, Diener worked with CIRAD on the Black Tiger farming (Penaeus monodon) and study the benefit to grow Black tiger together with Tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus and Oreochromis mossambicus) and Bangus/ Milkfish (Chanos chanos).
Since 2000, Diener has been based in Vietnam. After working for Proconco, a French-Vietnamese joint venture, and being part of the first team to develop feed formulation adapted for Pangasius farming in a large scale, Diener worked for six years as the sales manager in a Vietnamese company specialized in farming, processing and exporting of Pangasius. Diener worked in this company from its beginning to its apogee where it become one of the top 15 biggest seafood companies in Vietnam.
After that, Diener founded OFCO Sourcing in 2007, specializing in sourcing and inspection offering services as agent and trader. In 2008 they stopped their services of agent and trader, and concentrated on pre-shipment inspection, loading supervision and consultancy services. They stated that "we cannot be judge and party at the same time", that "we cannot correctly judge the quality of the consignment if we are also responsible for buying this consignment". To avoid any conflict of interest OFCO never negotiate prices with suppliers, they do not buy or sell seafood.
OFCO Sourcing expand to become in 2011 OFCO Group, an independent third party inspection company recognized internationally as one of the most reliable inspection company in Vietnam. After years of inspection in Vietnam, OFCO acquired the reputation to be reliable and incorruptible.
Diener is recognized as one of the most legitimate seafood specialist in Vietnam and have contributed to the development of the industry and especially to the expansion of Pangasius (Pangasius hypophthalmus). Several publications about Jean-Charles Diener attest of his actions to develop the seafood industry in Vietnam.
