The Humboldt Current System (HCS), also called the Peru Current, is a major Eastern Boundary Upwelling Ecosystem that flows north along the western coast of South America. It is an eastern boundary current flowing in the direction of the equator, and extend 500-1,000 kilometers offshore. The Humboldt Current is named after the Prussian naturalist Alexander von Humboldt. In 1846, von Humboldt reported measurements of the cold-water current in his book Cosmos.
The current extends from the southern Chile (~45’S) to northern Peru (~4’S) where cold, upwelled waters intersect warm tropical waters to form the Equatorial Front. Sea surface temperatures off the coast of Peru, around 5’S, reach temperatures as low as 16’C. This is highly uncharacteristic of tropical waters, as most other regions have temperatures measuring above 25’C. Upwelling brings nutrients to the surface, which support phytoplankton and ultimately increase biological productivity.
Upwelling within the current is not uniform across the entire system. Three notable upwelling subsystems are produced by this current: i) seasonal upwelling in Chile, ii) upwelling “shadow” that is less productive, but still large in northern Chile and Southern Peru, and iii) year-round upwelling in Peru.
The Humboldt Current is considered a Class I, highly productive (>300 gC/m2-yr), ecosystem. It is the most productive eastern boundary current system. It accounts for roughly 18-20% of the total worldwide marine fish catch. The species are mostly pelagic: sardines, anchovies and jack mackerel. The system’s high productivity supports other important fishery resources as well as marine mammals (eared seals and cetaceans) and seabirds. The cold, nutrient-rich water brought to the surface by upwelling drives the system’s extraordinary productivity.

Periodically, the upwelling that drives the system’s productivity is disrupted by the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) event. When this occurs, fish abundance and distribution are significantly affected, often leading to stock crashes and cascading social and economic impacts. These events have led to sequential changes, where sardines and anchovies have replaced each other periodically as the dominant species in the ecosystem. These species changes can have negative consequences for the fishing industry and the economies of the countries that fish the system.
The Humboldt has a considerable cooling influence on the climate of Chile, Peru and Ecuador. It is also largely responsible for the aridity of Atacama Desert in northern Chile and coastal areas of Peru and also of the aridity of southern Ecuador. Marine air is cooled by the current and thus is not conducive to generating precipitation (although clouds and fog are produced).
