Brain Age: Train Your Brain in Minutes a Day!,JPN also known as Dr. Kawashima's Brain Training: How Old Is Your Brain? in PAL regions, is an entertainment video game that employs puzzles. It was developed and published by the video gaming company Nintendo for the Nintendo DS handheld video game console. Nintendo has been careful not to claim the game has been scientifically validated, however stating that it is an "entertainment product 'inspired' by Kawashima's work in the neurosciences."
It was first released in Japan, and was later released in North America, Europe, Australia, and South Korea. It was followed by a sequel titled Brain Age 2: More Training in Minutes a Day!, and was later followed by two redesigns and Brain Age Express for the Nintendo DSi's DSiWare service which uses popular puzzles from these titles as well as several new puzzles, and Brain Age: Concentration Training for Nintendo 3DS.
Brain Age features a variety of puzzles, including stroop tests, mathematical questions, and Sudoku puzzles, all designed to help keep certain parts of the brain active. It was included in the Touch! Generations series of video games, a series which features games for a more casual gaming audience. Brain Age uses the touch screen and microphone for many puzzles. It has received both commercial and critical success, selling 19.00 million copies worldwide (as of March 31, 2013) and has received multiple awards for its quality and innovation. There has been controversy over the game's scientific effectiveness.
The game was suddenly made available on the Nintendo eShop in Japan on June 3, 2014 and in Europe on June 12, 2014 without any prior announcements, albeit Nintendo announced earlier in 2014 that they were preparing to release Nintendo DS titles for the Wii U, and the title is not only the first Nintendo DS game to be re-released as a Wii U Virtual Console title but was also available only to users who updated their system software to 5.0.0. It was being distributed for free until June 30, 2014 in Japan and July 10, 2014 in Europe and has been available for purchase in Europe since June 25, 2015.
