Nilli Lavie presented the perceptual load theory in the mid-nineties as a potential resolution to the early/late selection debate. This debate can be summated through two questions, firstly; when in the information processing stream does attention select target information? Secondly; to what degree do distractor stimuli get processed? Prior to Lavie’s theory there were several other suggestions as to how targets are perceived amongst distractor stimuli.
Researcher’s such as Donald Broadbent  argued that selection occurs during the early stages of processing by suggesting that information has to go through a sensory filter, and as that filter has a limited capacity all information that is not directly attended to will decay. Whilst researchers such as Deutsch and Deutsch argued that this filtering  of irrelevant stimuli occurs in the late stages of processing, in that, all of the information is processed on a sensory level but just before the level of working memory the semantic content of the message is the filter. Lavie attempts to resolve this debate by stating that both early and late selection occur varying on the stimulus presented.
From the perspective of perceptual load theory stimulus variation means whether the stimulus has high or low perceptual load. Perceptual load refers to the complexity of the physical stimuli, particularly the distractor stimuli e.g. a square surrounded by circles is a scene with low perceptual load whereas a square surrounded by lots of different shapes has high perceptual load. Due to the assumed limited capacity of attentional resources and that distractors have to be processed before the target it is suggested that, in high load tasks the targets attentional resources are depleted faster therefore being able to attend to the target sooner compared to a low load task. This is because the low load task needs to process more of the distractors to exhaust mental resources, therefore the distractors cause a greater inference in finding the target. This demonstrates that selection occurs both in the early stages of processing (high load condition) when the degree of inference is low as the majority of the resources process the target and enables the individual to ignore distractors. As well as the late stages (low load condition) when the distractors are perceived because they take up fewer attentional resources and as such spill over to the distractors which results in them being perceived, causing an interference.
