Cognitive slippage is considered a milder form of formal thought disorder. Generally speaking, this can mean that an individual’s thoughts are organized in an unusual, maladaptive, or illogical way. Cognitive slippage is manifested in patterns of speech where categories and lists become overly broad as concepts that seem unrelated at first glance become related through tangential connections. Though associated with difficulties in communication, it is not indicative of a lower level of intelligence. It is related to several mental disorders.
An example of cognitive slippage:
"List some types of cars."
"Let's see, there's Ford, Chevrolet, Toyota, Japan, Rising Sun, Hiroshima, Atomic Bomb, Enola Gay, oh and Miata."
The inclusion of extraneous items in the list is evidence of cognitive slippage. Although the concepts such as Toyota, Japan, Rising Sun, etc. are all related, the relation does not fall under the category of the initial prompt: types of cars.
Another example:
"What animals did you see at the zoo today?"
"We saw tigers, bears, Dolphins, the Baltimore Ravens, the Packers, Carolina Panthers, jaguars, lions, and otters."
Here we see the slip occur between animal names and football teams with animals as their mascot. As the person lists animals they saw at the zoo, they mention "bears" and "dolphins" which double as the names of NFL teams. This results in a "slip" to a tangentially related list of football teams then back again to animals after the mention of the Carolina Panthers relates to the other big cats they saw - jaguars and lions. The cognitive slippage is associated with an inability to identify and disregard these extraneous connections. It results in patterns of speech and associations similar to those seen here.
Though the features of cognitive slippage are identifiable in a clinical setting, the construct is loosely defined empirically. Cognitive slippage exists on a continuum from high to low levels and can be found in individuals with and without schizophrenia. In contrast, another disorder, word salad, is characterized by even more disorganized speech than the loose associations of cognitive slippage.
