CortiQ is a clinical tool developed by g.tec Medical Engineering (Graz, Austria) that uses state-of-the-art electrocorticographic (ECoG) technologies and advanced software algorithms to accurately map brain function in real time. It is the world’s only commercially available passive brain mapping system of its kind.
CortiQ’s integrated hardware/software package leverages g.tec’s long history of developing sophisticated yet easy to use brain-computer interface (BCI) technologies and expertise in current clinical practice to facilitate brain mapping for surgical planning. When used in tandem with conventional electrocortical stimulation (ECS) mapping, CortiQ aids neurologists and neurosurgeons in more rapidly localizing specific brain structures and functions prior to or during invasive brain surgeries. It significantly cuts down on the time required to obtain these maps, which mitigates risks associated with lengthier, more time-consuming traditional mapping procedures. These functional brain maps are essential for planning safe and effective surgical strategies.
Functional brain mapping during neurosurgery often proceeds as follows. Doctors place ECoG electrodes on the patient's brain. These electrodes are usually placed in configurations of one or more grids or strips to cover the regions of interest to the medical team. During functional mapping, the patient is usually asked to perform specific tasks to activate certain brain areas. With ECS mapping, electrodes are stimulated until the clinician determines a change in behavior (e.g., speech becomes interrupted). This procedure is lengthy and carries the risk of seizures. With cortiQ mapping, the software automatically detects changes in the brain signals recorded from the implanted electrodes. This procedure is much faster than ECS mapping, and does not carry additional risks for seizures. Functional mapping of the brain is critical to minimize potential functional deficits after surgery.
 The CortiQ software presents electrodes (overlaid on the brain) that change color in real-time as patients perform tasks. This makes it possible for doctors to modify or repeat a patient's task, which could help provide critical mapping information. For example, real-time maps of finger activity could convince a doctor to ask a patient to move a finger again, or move a different finger, to better map the motor cortex. In addition, the software has tools to map the brain by tracking high gamma activity, which can provide detailed information about brain function.
