Ut pictura poesis is a Latin phrase literally meaning "as is painting so is poetry." The statement (often repeated) occurs most famously in Horace's Ars Poetica, near the end, immediately after the "other" most famous quotation from Horace's treatise on poetics, "bonus dormitat Homerus," or "even Homer nods" (an indication that even the most skilled poet can compose inferior verse):
Poetry resembles painting. Some works will captivate you when you stand very close to them and others if you are at a greater distance. This one prefers a darker vantage point, that one wants to be seen in the light since it feels no terror before the penetrating judgment of the critic. This pleases only once, that will give pleasure even if we go back to it ten times over. (Quoting from English translation.)
Horace meant that poetry (in its widest sense, "imaginative texts") merited the same careful interpretation that was, in Horace's day, reserved for painting.
Roughly a century later, another man, Simonides of Keos, agreed with Horace's initial assessment stating, “Poema pictura loquens, pictura poema silens,” which translates into, “Poetry is a speaking picture, painting a silent poetry.” Yet, as this phrase has traversed history, it has ignited academic arguments over whether or not it's true. Plato, through his own thought process on credible knowledge, found painting and writing to be unreliable sources of understanding so disregarded the whole concept entirely. The lack of credibility rested on his opinion that both forms of art gave a false simulation of reality. Moving on from Plato’s time to the Renaissance, the argument sprung up of which form was superior. It was decided, at this time, painting took precedence because sight was higher ranking to people than hearing was.
Lessing opens his Laocoön: An Essay on the Limits of Painting and Poetry (1766) by observing that "the first who compared painting with poetry [Simonides of Ceos] was a man of fine feeling," though, Lessing makes it clear, not a critic or philosopher. Lessing argues that painting is a synchronic, visual phenomenon, one of space that is immediately in its entirety understood and appreciated, while poetry (again, in its widest sense) is a diachronic art of the ear, one that depends on time to unfold itself for the reader's appreciation. He recommends that poetry and painting should not be confused, and that they are best practiced and appreciated “as two equitable and friendly neighbors.”
W. J. T. Mitchell trenchantly observed that "We tend to think that to compare poetry with painting is to make a metaphor, while to differentiate poetry from painting is to state a literal truth."
