The Debt Exchange (also known as "DebtX") is one of the world's largest loan sale advisors for the sale of commercial, consumer and specialty finance debt. The company is engaged by commercial banks, insurance companies, investment banks, government agencies and other institutions.
DebtX’s core mission is to empower financial institutions with an ability to actively manage their portfolios by rating, valuing, buying and selling loans. The company is headquartered in Boston, Massachusetts with offices located throughout the United States, Europe, and South America.
DebtX is a pioneer and innovator in the commercial and residential loan industries. Upon inception in 2000, DebtX developed and deployed the first online loan sale platform. This platform enabled millions of imaged documents to be accessed virtually through a secure document sharing application. Subsequently, DebtX enhanced its platform to include multiple online auction capabilities, automated bid optimization, syndicated loan and participated loan tracking, joint book running, covenant compliance, and numerous other innovations. In 2005 DebtX opened the marketplace to direct loan sellers and loan syndicators.
In 2005, DebtX began offering analytics services based on actual transaction data. In addition to spread matrices and credit risk scores, DebtX has provided loan level valuations on more than ten trillion dollars in aggregate principal balance per year since 2010. DebtX’s proprietary loan sale and compliance platform as well as it loan valuation and credit scoring processes have been audited for security and are used by many of the world’s private and government financial institutions.
HISTORY
Founded in 2000, The Debt Exchange, Inc. (DebtX) was started to provide liquidity for loans and enable financial institutions to actively manage their portfolios by selling and buying loans via an Internet loan marketplace. The DebtX platform was utilized on a proprietary basis by DebtX’s Loan Sale Advisory Group until 2005, when DebtX offered its clients direct access to the marketplace; the marketplace has since grown to include hundreds of loan sellers and syndicators, and many more primary and secondary market participants. For more than 15 years, DebtX has collected trade data on transactions executed via the DebtX marketplace and has leveraged this data to provide independent, reliable and defendable estimated market prices on thousands of loans per month.
DebtX recently launched DXScore®, a credit rating system for commercial real estate (CRE) loans, using this same data to calibrate its models. The Debt Exchange was awarded patent number 7,035,820 by the United States Patent and Trademark Office in 2006 for its online loan sale and debt trading exchange system. In 2009, DebtX was awarded a second U.S. Patent No. 7,584,139 for its online loan sale and debt trading system, and in 2014 DebtX was awarded a third U.S. Patent No. 8,639,614 for its DXSyndicate product.
