Storage Wars: Texas (Originally Storage Wars Dallas) was a reality television series on the A&E Network that premiered in 2011. It was a regionalized spin-off of the highly-popular series Storage Wars.
As of the latter portion of Season 3, the show featured auctioneer Walt Cade, as well as auction hunters Victor Rjesnjansky, Ricky and Bubba Smith, Jenny Grumbles, and Mary Padian, with other buyers being included on some episodes, notably Lesa Lewis and her assistant Jerry Simpson (who were regulars on Season 1).
The premise was essentially the same as the parent show: when rent is not paid on a storage locker in Texas, the contents are sold by an auctioneer as a single lot of items. The show follows professional buyers who bid on the contents (usually for the purpose of reselling for profit should they purchase a locker) based only on a five-minute inspection and what they can see only from the door when it is opened. The episodes feature the winning buyers inspecting the contents (providing their estimate of their value), with one specific (and often unusual) item from each buyer featured being appraised to determine its worth.
Sixteen episodes were filmed for the first season, debuting on A&E on Tuesday December 6, 2011. The premiere episode garnered 4.1 million viewers, making it the most watched series launch in the network's history. Viewers got a glimpse of Storage Wars: Texas on the first Storage Wars: Unlocked special, when Ricky and Bubba appeared to present a teaser clip. It was revealed that the show was to have been originally called Storage Wars: Dallas. It was later revealed that Storage Wars: Texas and its parent series Storage Wars had both been renewed for another twenty-six episode season respectively, with the second season of Texas premiering on August 15, 2012. Storage Wars: Texas can be seen internationally as well, as AETN International has sold the series to several channels in Canada, United Kingdom, Poland, Finland, and the Netherlands. Between and during seasons, some buyers chose not to return to the show, or had done so only on certain episodes and not as regulars. The series ran for three seasons, and the final episode of the series aired on January 7, 2014.
