Freeman's, formerly known as Samuel T. Freeman & Co., is an auction house in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States. It was founded in 1805 by Tristram B. Freeman, a printseller who came to America from London. After an order from Pennsylvania Governor Thomas McKean, Freeman was appointed to the office of auctioneer in Philadelphia, where he subsequently began the company. Over the years Freeman’s has grown both nationally, opening regional offices throughout the US, and internationally, expanding into the European market after forming an alliance with Lyon & Turnbull in 2000. The current Chairman of Freeman’s is Samuel M “Beau” Freeman II, the sixth generation of the Freeman family to run the auction house.

Located at 1808 Chestnut Street, Freeman's offers over 25 in-house auctions a year in sale categories including: American Furniture, Folk & Decorative Arts, English & Continental Furniture & Decorative Arts, Asian Arts, American Art & Pennsylvania Impressionists, European Art & Old Masters, Modern and Contemporary Art, Books, Maps & Manuscripts, 20th Century Design, Jewelry & Watches, and Silver & Objets de Vertu.
On September 10, 2011, Freeman's held an auction that brought $3.5 million for a Jade seal, triple the highest sale in the company's history. The March 2014 sale of The George D. Horst Collection of Fine Art resulted in 20 auction records for artists  including Howard Russell Butler, Emil Carlsen, and Fred Wagner. Other notable auction records set at Freeman's include one for a sculpture by Wharton Esherick  as part of their annual Pennsylvania Sale in November 2014, a watercolor by famed artist and archeologist Howard Carter in June 2015, and contemporary artist Wojciech Fangor in May 2016.
Freeman’s has been entrusted with the sale of some of the world’s most fascinating collections of fine art and antiques, including the Richard M. Scrushy Collection, The Lehman Brothers Collection, Property from the Reed & Barton Archives, The Avon Collection of Photography and The Collection of Historic USS Constitution Colors of H. Richard Dietrich, Jr.
