Doyle New York is one of the world's largest auctioneers and appraisers of fine art, jewelry, furniture, decorations and other specialty categories. Located on Manhattan’s Upper East Side, Doyle offers approximately forty auctions each year. Doyle maintains a network of regional representatives throughout the United States and connections with other companies overseas.
Through the years, Doyle New York has auctioned the estates of such Hollywood legends as James Cagney, Gloria Swanson, Bette Davis, Rock Hudson, Rex Harrison, Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. and Ruth Gordon. Doyle also auctioned the estates of musicians Louis Armstrong and Count Basie, as well as the stage gowns of opera diva Marian Anderson. More recently, Doyle auctioned the estate of Fashion Editor Carrie Donovan, spokeswoman for Old Navy; and the estate of Lady Sarah Consuelo Spencer-Churchill, sister of the Duke of Marlborough and granddaughter of American Heiress Consuelo Vanderbilt. Doyle's auctioned in 2011 the contents (art, furniture, books, memorabilia) of the Upper East Side New York City bar and restaurant, located between 3 rd n Lexington avenues on 87th street.
Decorators and designers whose collections and estates were auctioned at Doyle New York include David Easton, Keith Irvine, Ronald Grimaldi, and Robert Denning. From the fashion world were the estates of Bonnie Cashin, Joe Eula and Geraldine Stutz; gowns from the collection of Marisa Berenson; and costume jewelry collections of Ann Getty and Brigid Berlin.
Doyle is also well known for its on-site auctions, including the sale of treasures from two legendary New York restaurants, Maxwell's Plum and the celebrated Russian Tea Room, as well as the on-site auction of the estate of noted American painter Ogden Pleissner.
In October 2009, Doyle New York auctioned the Estate of Beverly Sills, the American soprano. The company is also responsible for auctioning the furniture and art collection of former New York City Mayor, Edward Koch. Items included letters from Ronald Reagan, Bill Clinton, Margaret Thatcher and Yitzhak Rabin.
Doyle New York is a privately held company. The Chairman and CEO is Kathleen M. Doyle (wife of former New York Lieutenant Governor Richard Ravitch). The firm was founded in 1962 by the late William Doyle as William Doyle Antiques. In 1973, it was incorporated as William Doyle Galleries, Inc. Since 2001, it has been doing business as Doyle New York.
