The Brinton Museum located on the Quarter Circle A Ranch and formerly known as the Bradford Brinton Memorial Museum, is a museum and historic ranch located 2 miles (3.2 km) southwest of Big Horn, Wyoming. The ranch was built in 1893 by William Moncreiffe, a Scottish immigrant and successful businessman. In 1923, Bradford Brinton bought the ranch from Moncreiffe and expanded it to its current appearance. Brinton collected art and historical materials, particularly those relating to Native American history; after his death in 1936, his sister Helen converted the ranch to a museum displaying his collections.
Wyoming’s rolling Bighorn Mountains envelop The Brinton Museum on the Quarter Circle A Ranch. Its sweeping landscape and surrounding mountain range have been the muse of treasured American artists from Remington to Borein to Gollings, and the setting for rich cultural traditions integral to the American Indian tribes inhabiting this region. Today, it serves as a gleaming example of Wyoming’s transformation, and continues to delight and inspire artists and guests from around the world.
At the heart of The Brinton Museum is the art, historic documents, books and furnishings that made up Bradford Brinton’s original collection, which showcase the elegant and eclectic tastes of this well-educated Western gentleman. The permanent collection is on display in long-term exhibitions in the new facility as well as in its original setting in the Brinton Ranch House, and complemented by frequently changing shows featuring art of the 19th, 20th and 21st centuries. Each exhibition has been thoughtfully curated to tell a distinctive story of the American West through historical and contemporary perspectives. Through careful preservation and discriminating acquisition of new pieces, The Brinton honors the art and craftsmanship of the West and Bradford Brinton’s intent to support both.
The Brinton’s world-class staff guides visitors to understand celebrated artists of the past, their works, and how they’ve inspired contemporary artists to explore and expand the art of the American West. Through home and museum tours, hands-on educational programming, artists’ series and a variety of special events that celebrate The Brinton and the riches of the Quarter Circle A Ranch, students of all ages leave The Brinton Museum with a deeper connection to art, American history, and the spectacular environment that surrounds them.
