Rouse Hill House is an historic homestead and estate located in Rouse Hill, a suburb of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
Rouse Hill House and farm was the family home of Richard Rouse, the Colonial Superintendent of Public Works and Convicts at Parramatta. The homestead in the Australian Georgian style was developed between 1813 and 1819 with further developments in c. 1863. The homestead is managed by Sydney Living Museums as a museum that is open to the public for a modest fee. Much of the former grounds have been transformed into Rouse Hill Regional Park and subsequent residential and commercial developments.
On 2 April 1999 the estate was listed on the New South Wales State Heritage Register with the following statement of significance:

Rouse Hill House is one of the most significant and substantial houses of the Macquarie period which dates from 1810 to 1822. Rouse Hill House Estate is the largest and most complete publicly owned physical record - in the form of buildings, furnishings, artefacts and landscape relationship - of the occupancy and culture of a European-Australian family, encompassing the tastes, fortunes, and endeavours of seven generations from the early 19th century to the late 20th century.
The property is perhaps unique for its survival as a largely intact estate with an unbroken chain of occupancy, allwing the survival of major garden and interior elements of every period of its history to the present. This layering of artefacts and fashions is especially prevalent in the gardens where designs and physical details such as edging, fencing, planting containers, bed designs and paths provide a case history for the study of the development of garden practices in Australia.
The garden is perhaps Australia's oldest surviving colonial garden in relatively intact form. The surviving physical evidence in the gardens includes borders in a variety of materials, fence and gate remnants, fragments of trellis and arbours, paving and numerous soil displacements that become evident with the location's annual dry spells. These physical remains, matched with pictorial evidence from photographs, drawings and engravings of the property, and writings, have resulted in the identification of four stages of the garden's development: c.1825, c.1865, c.1885 and c.1968. This continuity and evidence of evolution of a very early intact garden from the first quarter of the 19th century to the Edwardian era and 20th century is extremely rare in Australia.
