Cultural appropriation, often framed as cultural misappropriation is a concept in sociology, dealing with the adoption of the elements of a minority culture by members of the dominant culture. It is distinguished from equal cultural exchange due the the presence of a colonial element and imbalance of power. Cultural (mis)appropriation is often portrayed as harmful in contemporary cultures, and is claimed to be a violation of the collective intellectual property rights of the originating, minority cultures, notably Indigenous cultures and those living under colonial rule. Often unavoidable when multiple cultures come together, cultural exchange, as well as misappropriation, can include using other cultures' cultural and religious traditions, fashion, symbols, language, and songs.
According to critics of the practice, cultural (mis)appropriation differs from acculturation, assimilation, or cultural exchange in that this (mis)appropriation is a form of colonialism: cultural elements are copied from a minority culture by members of a dominant culture, and these elements are used outside of their original cultural context—sometimes even against the expressly stated wishes of members of the originating culture.
Often, the original meaning of these cultural elements is lost or distorted, and such displays are often viewed as disrespectful, or even as a form of desecration, by members of the originating culture. Cultural elements which may have deep meaning to the original culture may be reduced to "exotic" fashion or toys by those from the dominant culture. Kjerstin Johnson has written that, when this is done, the imitator, "who does not experience that oppression is able to 'play', temporarily, an 'exotic' other, without experiencing any of the daily discriminations faced by other cultures." The African-American academic, musician and journalist Greg Tate argues that appropriation and the "fetishizing" of cultures, in fact, alienates those whose culture is being appropriated.
Some writers on the topic note that the concept is often misunderstood by the general public, and that charges of "cultural appropriation" are at times misapplied to situations that don't accurately fit, such as eating at restaurants of a variety of cultures, or learning about different cultures. Others see appropriation as "inevitable" and a contribution to "cultural diversity and free expression." Writing for The Daily Beast, John McWhorter specifically defended white appropriation of African-American music as "cross-fertilization", and something which is usually done out of admiration of the cultures being imitated, with no intent to harm them.
