educational theory that states that children can most easily acquire fluency in a second language by first acquiring fluency in their native language. Fluency is defined as linguistic fluency (such as speaking) as well as literacy (such as reading and writing). This approach to bilingual education is among those most commonly implemented in public schools across the United States.
The goal of transitional bilingual education is to help transition a student into an English-only classroom as quickly as possible. A bilingual teacher teaches children in subjects such as math, science, and social studies in their native language so that once the transition is made to an English-only classroom, the student has the knowledge necessary to compete with his peers in all other subject areas. Transitional Bilingual Education programs are introduced in kindergarten and can continue up to grade six or seven. Research has shown that many of the skills learned in the native language can easily be transferred to the second language later. This research reflects greater academic progress made by students in Transitional Bilingual Education programs in comparison with those enrolled in many English as a Second Language (ESL) programs. However, it also shows the relative ineffectiveness of Transitional Bilingual Education programs when compared with other bilingual models such as dual-language immersion. ESL courses are sometimes incorporated to provide supplemental instruction. The application of this educational model ultimately came about as a result of an effort to officially recognize Chicano and Latino identities with the passage of the Bilingual Education Act.
Transitional Bilingual Education programs are divided into two categories: early-exit and late-exit. Early-exit programs begin with strong support in the students' native language; nevertheless, this support is rapidly diminished. Late-exit programs, on the other hand, maintain strong support in the primary language. The fundamental difference between these two models is the length of the program.
