The Original Whizzinator is a product advertised as a "wet sex simulator" intended to simulate male urination as a safer alternative to using real urine for sexual fetish activity; but most consumers purchase the device to fraudulently defeat drug tests. The Whizzinator comes as a kit complete with dried urine and syringe, heater packs (to keep the urine at body temperature), a false penis (available in several skin tones including white, tan, Latino, brown, and black) and instruction manual. The company also offered a female version of the Whizzinator, called "Number One." There is no information on exactly how this product differs from the "disposable unisex" product also on the market. It was manufactured by Puck Technology of Signal Hill, California; a suburb of Los Angeles.
The device received media coverage in May 2005 in the United States after Onterrio Smith, a former Minnesota Vikings running back, was caught with one at the Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport, which resulted in his suspension. Actor Tom Sizemore has also brought the Whizzinator into the public eye after having been caught with one attempting to evade drug tests.
In 2006, a Pittsburgh-area woman and her friend were charged with disorderly conduct and criminal mischief after they asked a convenience store clerk to microwave one of the devices so the woman could pass a drug test. The clerk, thinking it was a real penis, called police. The mischief charge was dropped after the friend agreed to replace the oven (OSHA regulations do not allow an oven to be used when bodily fluids are placed in it).
The United States Congress held hearings on the Whizzinator on May 17, 2005.
The Whizzinator continues to appear occasionally in news stories. In August 2015, a Chicago man on probation in Indiana was probably caught using the device to cheat on a mandatory drug test. He had gone to the probation office for Cook County, Illinois to take the test, and according to a police report repeatedly looked over his shoulder while urinating for the test, which drew the suspicion of a probation officer.
