Wayman Crow McCreery (June 14, 1851 –1901) was a real estate agent, opera composer and the internal revenue collector of St. Louis. However, he is most well known as the popularizer and possible inventor of three-cushion billiards. Playwright Augustus Thomas' wrote of him in 1922:

A moving spirit in the McCullough Club—in its organization, its management, and in its active expression—was Wayman McCreery, now dead. I am sure that ten thousand of his surviving contemporaries in the city of St. Louis will remember Wayman McCreery. Few men are so physically and intellectually equipped as he was. There was nothing that an athlete could do with his body that in a notable degree Wayman McCreery could not do. He was boxer, wrestler, fencer, runner, and swimmer, and all-round athlete. In addition to these he was a graceful step dancer. Intellectually he was equipped with a college training and had an interest in everything that interested the intelligent people of his day. He sang well enough to be a leading tenor in a fashionable choir. He wrote music of good quality. He was the author of the opera "L'Afrique," which was first done by amateurs in St. Louis and subsequently produced in New York, although with not very great success, by Jesse Williams. McCreery will be remembered by the sporting world as the inventor of the three cushion game of billiards, of which he was at one time the national champion. As Hugh Chalcot in Robertson's comedy "Ours" it would have taken a professional to equal him. Another part of McCreery's was Captain Hawtree in "Caste," by the same author. 

The very first tournament at three-cushion billiards took place January 14 – 31, 1878 in C. E. Mussey's Room in St. Louis, with McCreery a participant. The tourney was won by New Yorker Leon Magnus. The high run for the tournament was just 6 points, and the high average a .75.
According to a January 2, 1897 article appearing in the Saturday Evening News, soon after McCreery's appointment as St. Louis' internal revenue collector, he was described as "probably the most accomplished officeholder in the service of the government. He has held the college record for the long distance baseball throw, has been a champion amateur billiardist, is choirmaster of Christ Church Cathedral, is a good singer [and] has composed an opera."
McCreery won the Amateur Championship of Missouri in 1868, and defended his title "emblem" three times. He posted high runs during competition of 336 at straight rail; 54 at cushion caroms, and 14 at three cushion—in which his "remarkable skill has given him a worldwide reputation." In the estimation of Willie Hoppe, a 51-time world champion in three forms of carom billiards, McCreery was "one of the finest performers [at straight rail] in the country."
In February 1899, McCreery participated with two other contestants, Martin Mullen and Wilson P. Foss, in the American Athletic Union's Class A Amateur Championship of America, at fourteen point balkline, held at New York City's Knickerbocker Club. They were described by the Brooklyn Daily Eagle as "without doubt the best three amateurs in the country". There, McCreery set two amateur world records: the first for a high run of 139 points in one game, and the second for maintaining a point average of 13.33, in the context of a race to 400 points.
McCreery was secretary of the Security Building Company.
A Te Deum Laudamus was written by McCreery, as was the music to the libretto L'Afrique, also known as "the Tale of the Dark Continent".
McCreery was married and had three daughters and a son.
