Jubilee Sailing Trust is a charitable organisation in the United Kingdom which owns and operates two square-rigged three-masted barques, the STS Lord Nelson and the SV Tenacious.
The Jubilee Sailing Trust, based in Southampton, is a sail training charity registered with the Charity Commission. Founded in 1978 with money from the Silver Jubilee of Elizabeth II fund by Christopher Rudd, a keen sailor, its aims are: "To integrate both able-bodied and disabled persons through Tall Ship sailing". The JST gets everyone on board involved in sailing the ships to the extent of their abilities, focusing on what people can do, instead of what they can't.
STS Lord Nelson and SV Tenacious are pioneers in the world of tall ships. They are the only two vessels which have been designed and purpose-built to allow people of all physical abilities to sail side-by-side on equal terms. There are 8 wheelchair cabins with two bunks each, with the remaining accommodation being 'dorm-style'. All beds are fixed single bunks. Both vessels are equipped with additional measures to allow for disabled people to sail, including: a speaking compass, visual and tactile alarms around the ship to supplement emergency announcements, disabled toilets, signage and diagrams in Braille, power-assisted steering for the ship's wheel, wheelchair lifts around the ship, wider passageways, and tactile markers to assist the visually impaired in finding their way around.
Each year the JST takes around 2,000 adults to sea, both able-bodied and physically disabled. Each ship can sail with up to 40 voyage crew, half of whom may be physically disabled and are guided through each task on board by eight or nine permanent crew members (professional seafarers) and three or more volunteer crew. The ships sail around the United Kingdom, Western Europe, the Canary Islands and the Caribbean.
From October 2012 to September 2014, STS Lord Nelson sailed around the world in the first JST circumnavigation, visiting 30 countries spanning all seven continents. In October 2013, STS Lord Nelson participated in the International Fleet Review 2013 in Sydney, Australia.
