Adam Owen Ph.D (born 5 September 1980 in Wrexham) is a Welsh football coach holding the UEFA Professional Coaching Licence. Owen currently works for Lechia Gdańsk, Poland as a manager. He attained a doctorate in Sport Science through Claude Bernard Lyon.1 University, Lyon in France, having previously completed a Master of Philosophy Degree in Sport & Exercise Science. Owen is seen as a popular researcher in the area of 'Football Science' having produced many contemporary research publications whilst authoring the book 'Football Conditioning: A Modern Scientific Approach'.
As a player Owen started at then English League One club Wrexham having been signed by Brian Flynn at the age of 16. Upon leaving his hometown club as a player, he started coaching full-time in their elite Academy programme. After obtaining a BSc (HONS) degree in Sport & Exercise Science from Glyndwr University (formerly NEWI) as well as the UEFA 'A' Coaching Licence, Owen continued his playing career in the League of Wales with Newtown, Airbus UK Broughton F.C., Connahs Quay Nomads & Cefn Druids AFC. During the 2001/2002 season Owen was selected to represent the Welsh University team in the British University Games playing against England & Scotland.
During the 2003/2004 season Owen moved to Celtic as a youth coach for the Under-17 & Under-19 teams. After a year at Parkhead he progressed to working with the reserve team squad whilst playing in the Scottish Third Division for East Stirlingshire.
Upon leaving his position at Celtic F.C he undertook a first team management role at Sheffield Wednesday to firstly work under Paul Sturrock, and later Brian Laws within the English Championship.
In March 2007, he then moved back to Scotland to join the management team at Rangers F.C working closely with Walter Smith, Ally McCoist and Kenny McDowall. Whilst working at Rangers F.C, Owen completed the UEFA Professional Coaching Diploma, becoming one of the youngest to do so. Owen had been described as a key member of the back room staff by Smith at Rangers F.C with his coaching & training methods receiving positive exposure as the club performed well throughout various Champions League & UEFA Cup campaigns which involved the 2008 UEFA Cup Final. In addition to club football, Owen has continued to work at International level for the senior men's Welsh National Football team and was part of the successful Euro 2016 campaign as they reached the semi-final stage, having worked under Brian Flynn, Gary Speed & currently Chris Coleman.
In June 2013, Owen left Rangers F.C to join Sheffield United, taking on the duel post of "Head of Performance/Assistant Manager", working alongside manager David Weir.
Owen played a leading part in the development of the first ever Professional football scholarship in the UK known as the 'Wrexham Glyndwr Football Academy' (GWFA). The scholarship concept was at the time initiated between Wrexham F.C & Glyndwr University.
At the beginning of the 2014–15 season, Owen joined Swiss giants FC Servette based in Geneva, Switzerland as Assistant Manager & Head of Performance where he remained for the duration of his 3 year contract working under managers Kevin Cooper & Bosko Djurovski. The club underwent a successful transition period before Owen left. Upon leaving FC Servette in the summer of 2017 Owen accepted a new duel position at Ekstraklasa club side Lechia Gdańsk as Assistant Manager & Director of Performance.
