Mineralogy is an active science in which minerals are discovered or recognised on a regular basis. Use of old mineral names is also discontinued, for example when a name is no longer considered valid. Therefore, a list of recognised mineral species is never complete. The International Mineralogical Association (IMA) is the international group that recognises new minerals and new mineral names. However, minerals discovered before 1959 did not go through the official naming procedure. Some minerals published previously have been either confirmed or discredited since that date. This list contains a mixture of mineral names that have been approved since 1959 and those mineral names believed to still refer to valid mineral species (these are called "grandfathered" species). Presently, each year about 50-60 new mineral species are officially approved by the Commission on New Minerals, Nomenclature and Classification (CNMNC) of the International Mineralogical Association.
The IMA/CNMNC administrates c. 6,500 names, and as of May 2017, the Handbook of Mineralogy lists 4,375 species. As of February 2017, the IMA Database of Mineral Properties/ Rruff Project lists 5,208 valid species (IMA/CNMNC) of a total of 5,421 minerals. There are 1,289 Pre-IMA minerals.
As of April 2011, the Webmineral.com lists 2,722 published and approved (IMA/CNMNC) minerals, 1,627 pre-IMA minerals, 81 discredited minerals (IMA/CNMNC status), 2,691 synonyms, 149 approved minerals but without a published description yet and 123 "not approved" names.

Due to the length of this list, it is divided into alphabetical groups. The minerals are sorted by name.

Abbreviations:
"*" – discredited (IMA/CNMNC status).
"s.p." – special procedure.
Q or "?" – questionable/doubtful (IMA/CNMNC, mindat.org or mineralienatlas.de status).
N – published without approval of the IMA/CNMNC, or just not an IMA approved mineral but with some acceptance in the scientific community nowadays. The 'IMA database of mineral properties' (rruff.info/ima) has 173 species with 'not an IMA approved mineral' tag, some are an intermediate member of a solid solution series, others are "recently" discredited minerals.
I – intermediate member of a solid-solution series.
H – hypothetical mineral (synthetic, anthropogenic, etc.)
ch – incomplete description, hypothetical solid solution end member. Published without approval and formally discredited or not approved, yet.
Mainly: pyrochlore, tourmaline and amphibole supergroups, arrojadite, and yftisite-(Y). IMA/CNMNC revisions generate hypothetical solid solution endmembers.

group – a name used to designate a group of species, sometimes only a mineral group name.
