OXO Biodegradable OXO-biodegradation is defined by CEN (the European Standards Organisation) {CEN/TR 1535–2006} as "degradation resulting from oxidative and cell-mediated phenomena, either simultaneously or successively." Sometimes described as "OXO-degradable" this describes only the first or oxidative phase. These descriptions should not be used for material which degrades by the process of OXO-biodegradation defined by CEN, and the correct description is "OXO-biodegradable."
There are two different types of biodegradable plastic:
Oxo-biodegradable plastic, made from polymers such as PE (polyethylene), PP (polypropylene), and PS (polystyrene) containing extra ingredients (metal salts) and tested according to ASTM D6954 or BS8472 or AFNOR Accord T51-808 to degrade and biodegrade in the open environment
Vegetable based plastics (also loosely knows as bio-plastics "bioplastics" or "compostable plastics"). These are tested in accordance with ASTM D6400 or EN13432 to biodegrade in the conditions found in industrial composting or biogas facilities.
OXO-bio plastic is conventional polyolefin plastic to which has been added small amounts of metal salts. These salts catalyze the degradation process to speed it up so that the OXO plastic will degrade abiotically at the end of its useful life in the presence of oxygen much more quickly than ordinary plastic. At the end of this process it is no longer visible, as it has been converted via Carboxylation or Hydroxylation to small-chain organic chemicals which will then biodegrade when the right fungi and/or bacteria are present. The degradation process is shortened for abiotic degradation and thereafter the rate of biodegradation depends on the micro-organisms in the environment. Timescale for complete biodegradation is much shorter than for "conventional" plastics which, in normal environments, are very slow to biodegrade and cause large scale harm. There is however a lot of doubt on the complete biodegradation of oxo-biodegradable plastics. It is stated that the bags actually break down into smaller fragments, not visible for the eye, rather than biodegrade. Recent studies now urge a complete ban on the selling of these types of plastics. The bags are also not compostable. Many countries are now debating whether they should ban these types of bags. Recent studies now urge a complete ban on the selling of these types of plastics
