Land consumption as part of human resource consumption is the conversion of land with healthy soil and intact habitats into areas for industrial agriculture, traffic (road building) and especially urban human settlements. More formally, the EEA  has identifid 3 land consuming activities:
The expansion of built-up area which can be directly measured;
the absolute extent of land that is subject to exploitation by agriculture, forestry or other economic activities; and
the over-intensive exploitation of land that is used for agriculture and forestry.
In all of those respects, land consumption is equivalent to typical land use in industrialized regions and civilizations.

Since often aforementioned conversion activities are virtually irreversible, the term land loss is also used. From 1990 to 2000, 1.4 million hectares (3.5×10^6 acres) of open space were consumed in the U.S.. In Germany, land is being consumed at a rate of more than 70 hectares (170 acres) every day (~250 thousand hectares (620,000 acres) per 10 years).

Urban growth reduces open space in and around cities, impacting biodiversity and ecosystem services

Land loss can also happen due to natural factors, like erosion or desertification - nevertheless most of those can also eventually be tracked back to human activities. Another slightly different interpretation of the term is the forced displacement or compulsory acquisition of a native people or settlers from their original land due to land grabbing, etc.. Again, in most cases, this will be due to economic reasons like search for profitable investment and commodification of natural resources.
Even though global land loss progresses at an alarming rate, the land footprint, the area required by some Western countries can a lot larger than the land actually used or even available in the country itself.
While land prices have surged in the first few years of the 21st century, land consumption economy still lacks environmental full-cost accounting to add the long-term costs of environmental degradation.
