Reinforcement (sometimes called secondary contact) is a process of speciation where pre-zygotic isolation is enhanced by natural selection against hybrids between two populations of a species. The idea was originally developed by Alfred Russel Wallace and is still often referred to as the Wallace effect. The modern concept of reinforcement originates from Theodosius Dobzhansky. He envisioned a species separated in allopatry, where secondary contact produces hybrids with lower fitness, so natural selection favors enhanced pre-zygotic isolation (members of one species who do not mate with members of the other enjoy greater reproductive success). The support for reinforcement has fluctuated since its inception. Various objections have been raised by evolutionary biologists as to the plausibility of its occurrence. Since the 1990s, data from theory, experiments, and nature have overcome many of the past objections, rendering reinforcement widely accepted. However, its ubiquity remains unknown as well as its prevalence in nature. Furthermore, terminological confusion and differences in usage over history has led to multiple meanings and complications.
Reinforcement is one of the few cases in which selection can favor an increase in pre-zygotic isolation, influencing the process of speciation directly. This aspect has been particularly appealing among evolutionary biologists. Numerous models have been developed to understand its operation in nature, most relying on several facets: genetics, population structures, influences of selection, and mating behaviors.
Empirical support for reinforcement exists, both in the laboratory and in nature. Documented examples are found in a wide range of organisms: amphibians, birds, crustaceans, echinoderms, fish, fungi, insects, mammals, molluscs, and plants. The secondary contact of originally separated incipient species is increasing due to human activities such as the introduction of invasive species or the modification of natural habitats. This has implications for measures of biodiversity and may become more relevant in the future.
