A plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV) is a hybrid electric vehicle that uses rechargeable batteries, or another energy storage device, that can be recharged by plugging it in to an external source of electric power as well as an on-board internal combustion engine and generator. Most PHEVs are passenger cars but there are also PHEV versions of commercial vehicles and vans, utility trucks, buses, trains, motorcycles, scooters, and military vehicles.
Similarly to all-electric vehicles, plug-in hybrids displace emissions from the car tailpipe to the generators powering the grid. These sources may be renewable or may have lower emission than an internal combustion engine. Charging the battery from the grid can be lower cost than using the on-board engine, helping to reduce operating cost.
Chinese battery manufacturer and automaker BYD Auto released the F3DM to the Chinese fleet market in December 2008 and began sales to the public in Shenzhen in March 2010. GM began delivering the Chevrolet Volt in the United States in December 2010; it was the first electric car with a range extender for retail sale in the American market. As of December 2016, there are over 30 models of series-production highway legal plug-in hybrids for retail sales, including some limited-production luxury sport cars. Plug-in hybrid cars are available mainly in the United States, Canada, Western Europe, Japan, and China. As of December 2016, the Chevrolet Volt family, including its siblings Opel/Vauxhall Ampera, is the world's best-selling plug-in hybrid in history with combined sales of about 134,500 units. The Mitsubishi Outlander P-HEV is the world's second top-selling plug-in hybrid, with global sales of about 119,500 units, followed by the Toyota Prius PHV, with almost 78,000 units delivered globally, both, through December 2016.
As of December 2016, the global stock of plug-in hybrid cars totaled almost 800,000 units, out of over two million light-duty plug-in electric cars on the world roads at the end of 2016. As of December 2015, the United States ranked as the world's largest plug-in hybrid car market with a stock of 193,770 units, followed by China with 86,580 vehicles, the Netherlands with 78,160, Japan with 55,470 units, and the UK with 28,250.
Flexibility in power demand, diverse usage patterns and storage capability of PHEVs grow the elasticity of residential electricity demand remarkably. This elasticity can be used to form the daily aggregated demand profile and/or alter instantaneous demand of a system wherein a large number of residential PHEVs share one electricity retailer.
