The American Public Transportation Association (APTA), formerly known as the American Public Transit Association, is a nonprofit organization which serves as an advocate for the advancement of public transportation programs and initiatives in the United States. Since its founding in 1882 (as the American Street Railway Association), APTA has educated the public about the benefits of public transportation through organized bus, paratransit, light rail, commuter rail, subways, waterborne services, high-speed rail, and intercity and passenger rail programs. It lobbies the U.S. Congress and local government bodies in favor of public transportation improvements and new developments.
APTA holds an annual convention and a triennial exposition called APTA Expo; the location of these events varies from year to year. The APTA Expo is the world's largest trade show for the public transportation industry. APTA also oversees the annual International Bus Roadeo and International Rail Rodeo. APTA publishes a biweekly news magazine, called Passenger Transport.
Effective January 1, 2000, the organization's name was changed from American Public Transit Association to American Public Transportation Association. As of January 1, 2016, APTA has more than 1,500 member organizations. On April 29, 2016, Richard A. White took the helm as Acting President and CEO of APTA.
White has over 40 years of experience in the public transportation industry and served as General manager and CEO at the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, as well as in various roles with Bay Area Rapid Transit, Houston METRO, and New Jersey Transit. He also served in the Urban Mass Transportation Administration and is a former APTA Chairman.
In 2015, APTA played a key role in the passage of the FAST ACT that provided a steady funding source for agencies to continue to grow and update their systems over the next five years.
On April 8, 2016, the New York MTA, the nation's largest public transit agency, announced it would withdraw from APTA.


