The NASA Space Settlement Contest is an annual design competition for 6-12th grade students sponsored by the NASA Ames Research Center and the NSS (National Space Society). This contest is open to students ages eleven through eighteen from anywhere in the world. Individuals compete as individuals or part of a team in two categories, in teams of up to six students, and in teams of seven or more students.
The goal of this contest is to have students learn about science and teamwork while working on projects to develop space settlement designs. Students submit a report about their designs to NASA Ames, and the reports are judged by aerospace professionals. Awards are given for artistic and literary merit as well. The director of the event is Al Globus.
This annual contest, co-sponsored by NASA Ames and the National Space Society (NSS) is for all students up to 12th grade (18 years old) from anywhere in the world. Individuals, small teams of two to five, and large teams of six or more are judged separately. Entries are also grouped by age/grade of the oldest contestant for judging. The age groups are 7th and under, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th, 13th, 14th. The grand prize is awarded to the best entry regardless of contestant age. Students develop space settlement designs and related materials. These are sent to NASA Ames for judgement
This year 994 entries from 3,007 students sponsored by 380 teachers were received . Entries came from 21 countries: Bulgaria, Canada, People's Republic of China, Republic of China, Czech Republic, India, Ireland, Japan, Malayasia, Mexico, Montenegro, Nepal, Pakistan, Romania, Serbia, Sri Lanka, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States, and Uruguay. U.S. entries were received from 14 states and territories: California, Colorado, Illinois, Kansas, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Nevada, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Puerto Rico, Texas, and Virginia.
The Grand Prize for the 2015 Space Settlement Contest went to Alexander R. (grade 12), for creating The Freyr Project under the instruction of Dr. Deano S. (Greenhills School), from Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States. The selections are further divided into first, second, third prizes and honorable mentions. All the participants are invited to the ISDC conference and everyone receives a certificate.
