Eosinophilic myocarditis is inflammation in the heart muscle that is caused by the infiltration and destructive activity of a type of white blood cell, the eosinophil. Typically, the disorder is associated with hypereosinophilia, i.e. an eosinophil blood cell count greater than 1,500 per microliter (normal 100 to 400 per microliter). It is distinguished from the other form of myocarditis which is caused by other types of white blood cell, lymphocytes and monocytes, as well as two respective descendants of these cells, NK cells and macrophages. This distinction is important because the eosinophil-based disorder is due to a particular set of underlying diseases and preferred treatments that differ from those for non-eosinophilic myocarditis.
Eosinophilic myocarditis is often viewed as a disorder that has three progressive stages, an inflammatory stage of eosinophilic myocarditis, a thrombotic stage wherein the endocardium (i.e. interior wall) of the diseased heart forms thrombi (i.e. blood clots) which embolize to dominate the clinical presentation, and a fibrotic stage wherein fibrosis scarring replaces damaged muscle tissue to cause a clinical presentation dominated by a poorly contracting heart and cardiac valve disease. Perhaps less commonly, eosinophilic myocarditis, eosinophilic thrombotic myocarditis, and eosinophilic fibrotic myocarditis are viewed as three separate but sequentially linked disorders in a spectrum of disorders termed eosinophilic cardiac diseases. The focus here is on eosinophilic myocarditis as a distinct disorder separate from its thrombotic and fibrotic sequelae.
Eosinophilic myocarditis is a rare disorder. It is usually associated with, and considered secondary to, an underlying cause for the pathological behavior of the eosinophils such a toxic reaction to a drug (one of its more common causes in developed nations), the consequence of certain types of parasite and protozoan infections (a more common cause of the disorder in areas with these infestations), or the result of excessively high levels of activated blood eosinophils due to a wide range of other causes. The specific treatment (i.e. treatment other than measures to support the cardiovascular system) of eosinphilic myocarditis differs from the specific treatment of other forms of myocarditis in that it focus on relieving the underling reason for the excessively high numbers and hyperactivity of eosinophils as well as on inhibiting the pathological actions of these cells.
