Pay at the pump is a system used at some filling stations where customers can pay for their fuel by inserting a credit or debit card or fuel card into a slot on the pump, bypassing the requirement to make the transaction with the station attendant or to walk away from one's vehicle.
The system was introduced in 1982 in Europe, and was first used in the USA by Mobil in 1986. Paul Luthra, who had graduated at the top of his class at National Institute of Technology, Kashmir with subsequent graduate degrees from XLRI- Xavier School of Management and the William E. Simon Graduate School of Business Administration, was working for Ponderosa Steakhouse and Bonanza Steakhouse in Dayton, Ohio as a Senior Systems Analyst. On a rainy day in 1978, his manager and mentor Bill Fessler (a graduate of Miami University) stopped at a gas station. Paul watched Bill from the car and noticed the two trips to the cashier hut. At that moment, with the mind-set of a time and motion engineer, Paul saw that an application of ATM technology at the pumps would make it convenient and quicker to buy gas. Banks had recently adopted the ATM technology. He shared his thoughts with Bill. Subsequently Bill Fessler changed jobs and joined Mobil, got funded to the tune of $3 million for research and development and got the system implemented. The system allows customers the convenience of not having to walk far from their vehicle, wait in line, or wait for the human station attendant to process the transaction. It also provides the attendants the advantage of being able to tend to other duties rather than being busy with customers. Only 13 percent of convenience stores had the technology by 1994, but 80 percent of U.S. convenience stores used the technology by 2002, and virtually all stores do today. In 2004, Sheetz was the first to use touch-screen kiosks by the pump where customers can also order in-store foodservice items that they pick up after fueling. In 2012 Zarco USA was the first to have ordering touch screens on the pump.

It is seen as a way to keep the cost of gasoline down by reducing the need for employees at filling stations. It is considered to be a major change from the days in which full service was the norm at filling stations, and the attendant not only pumped fuel, but also washed the windshield, and checked the fluids and tire pressure, all while the customer remained in the vehicle Full service is legally mandated in the U.S. states of New Jersey and Oregon. Oregon allows for commercial self serve of gasoline for business use only through a cardlock network such as Pacific Pride or CFN cardlock networks.
