The European Banking Federation (abbreviated EBF or FBE in French) was established in 1960. The EBF is the voice of Europe’s banking sector in all regulatory debates at European and global level. It represents 32 national banking Associations (in EU and EFTA countries) representing 3500 banks and about two million employees.
The EBF acts as a forum, where members' initiatives are proposed and debated, as well as a dialogue partner with European institutions regarding legislation in the banking sphere, with the aim of ensuring that the experience and the views of banks are taken into consideration in the shaping of relevant policies.
The European Banking Federation aims to achieve the single market in financial services.
The banking sector is at the heart of Europe’s economy. Europe’s banking sector is the world’s largest banking system in the world’s largest economic space. It plays a crucial role in fuelling the economy by lending to households, governments and business. EU banks finance EUR 24.3 trillion in loans and serve some 400 million European citizens.
In its early years, the EU concentrated on the integration of trade in goods, rather than services. As a result, banking, as such, was not directly affected to any great extent, but it was only natural that banks, like any other business, should express their strong views on proposals to achieve economic integration, e.g. in matters such as company law and taxation.
Since the 1970s, however, the situation has changed significantly, and the Community institutions have increasingly focused on banking matters. Nowadays, European legislation continues to be extended to cover areas such as freedom of establishment for banks and other financial institutions, harmonisation of banking supervision, accounting and a number of other subjects relevant to the business of banking. By increasingly shaping national legislation in these areas, Community directives and other legislative measures have a direct impact on the banks of the Member States, in their activities at home as well as abroad. The EBF is an obvious dialogue partner for the European institutions in laying out this legislation.
Furthermore, the role of the Federation as the united voice of all EU banks has naturally led it to be a forum where members' initiatives are proposed and debated. Meetings are arranged on matters of concern to the whole European banking sector, specialised Working Groups and Committees analyse specific questions and propose solutions, leading to the publication of reports or position papers. Finally, the role of the Federation is by no means limited to European matters. It extends to broader issues of importance to all European banks vis-à-vis their counterparts and supervisory authorities throughout the world.
