The Assured Income for the Severely Handicapped (AISH) is the legal name of a social welfare program and service offered only in Alberta, Canada, to nearly 46,000 Albertans.
The AISH Act legislation, proclaimed on May 1, 2007, and updated as of November 1, 2010, defines a “severe handicap” as “adult Albertans with a permanent disability that severely impairs their ability to earn a living.” The legal definition in the legislation defines “severe handicap” as an impairment of mental or physical functioning or both that, in the AISH director’s findings, causes substantial limitation in the person’s ability to earn a livelihood. Also, he/she is likely to continue to be affected permanently because no remedial therapy is available that would materially improve the person’s ability to earn a regular livelihood. The final decision on a client's file status is made by the AISH director, after receiving any relevant medical or psychological reports from a qualified health professional(s). It is important to clarify the definition of “minister responsible” in so far as Alberta legislation is laden with intricate, interwoven provisions to give considerable legal and discretionary authority to the minister and the associate minister, as provided for in respective acts and regulation.
In the 2004 Alberta provincial election, AISH was the subject of some controversy following supposedly derogatory remarks made by Premier of Alberta Premier Ralph Klein, stating, of a group of AISH recipients, "they didn't look handicapped to me.". It is also important to note that the Alberta AISH program has been widely known to force its recipients to remain below the poverty line. Due to the lack of accountability, within the Alberta government, the AISH legislation also prevents clients from seeking adequate, and fair, due process during the appeals process. Clients may appeal any decision against them, but that the board will not grant them any form of reconciliation as their legislation prevents them from taking any real form of action. Clients will also be held accountable for any, and all, errors which are made by employees of AISH and the department from which it operates. The result of this will force clients into greater poverty as AISH takes every opportunity to claw back funds from the most vulnerable Albertans.
