This article refers to the institution. For the child abuse scandal, see Casa Pia child sexual abuse scandal.

The Casa Pia is a Portuguese institution founded by Maria I, known as A Pia ("Mary the Pious"), and organized by Police Intendant Pina Manique in 1780, following the social disarray of the 1755 Lisbon earthquake. For almost three centuries, thousands of young boys and girls were raised by Casa Pia, including many public personalities, called casapianos. Casa Pia is Portugal's largest educational institution dedicated to helping youngsters in risk of social exclusion or without parental support.
The organisation is composed of ten schools and enrolls approximately 4700 students. In addition to standard schooling, the organisation also provides boarding for children in need. It strives to enable these youngsters to become healthy and successful members of society, by developing intellectual, manual, and physical traits, in an environment promoting spiritual, moral, and religious values. The institution is proud to have had amongst its students many outstanding Portuguese personalities, including politicians, journalists, and artists.
The first location was in Castle of São Jorge of Lisbon, an important center of production for the Portuguese Royal Navy and Army, and also for vocational education: masters trained at Casa Pia, when returned to their home, instruct others in the same profession. More advanced alumns may advance to professional careers. Next level course studies at London (for medicine), the Portuguese Royal Navy academy, Rome, and the Portuguese Academy.
Two years after the death of Pina Manique, the Casa Pia closed due to the occupation of the Castle of São Jorge by the French troops of Junot. The school reopened in 1812 at Convento do Desterro, and then the government moved the institution to Jerónimos Monastery, Lisbon at 1833. In 1942, it created a network of homes for children. At this time it is formed by:
Colégio de Pina Manique
Colégio de D. Maria Pia
Colégio de D. Nuno Álvares Pereira
Colégio de Santa Clara
Colégio de Santo Christo
Colégio de Nossa Senhora da Conceição
Colégio de Santa Catarina
Colégio de António Aurélio da Costa Ferreira
Escola Agrícola de Francisco Margiochi - polo do Arrife e polo da Paiã
Centro Educativo e de Apoio Social do Monte da Caparica
And also as complementary services:
Provedoria
Centro Cultural Casapiano
Colónia Balnear da Areia Branca (Lourinhã)
Centro de Educação Ambiental e Cultural de Colares
Equipamento de férias do Arrife
Equipamento de férias da Matela
