The New Jersey Anti-Bullying Bill of Rights Act, also known as P.L. 2010, Chapter 122, is a policy created in 2011 by New Jersey legislature to combat bullying in public schools throughout the state. This act is an extension of the state’s original anti-bullying law, N.J.S.A 18A:37-13, which was first enacted in 2002.
Both the New Jersey House of Representatives and the Senate passed the law unanimously in November 2010 and Governor Christie signed the bill on January 5, 2011. The law began to take effect at the beginning of the 2011 school year. Along with both Democratic and Republican legislators, organizations such as Garden State Equality, the Anti-Defamation League of New Jersey, and the New Jersey Coalition for Bullying Awareness and Prevention worked on creating this policy. The Anti-Bullying Bill of Rights provides a strong and thorough definition of bullying. The new bill’s definition not only describes bullying as a harmful action towards another student, but as any act that infringes on a student’s rights at school. In addition to defining bullying more clearly, the new bill will require that every public school, including higher education institutions, report all cases of bullying or teasing to the state. Verbal reports must be given to principals on the day of an observed incident and a written report must be provided within two days. Families must be notified, as well as the superintendent of schools, and an investigation must take place within ten days of the incident. Schools must also have a plan that outlines how they will address bullying and all teachers and administrators must be trained to identify and respond to bullying.
In addition to ensuring that schools are prepared to recognize and report bullying, the Anti-Bullying Bill of Rights also takes steps to ensure that schools are creating a positive environment for students. The law requires that every school have an anti-bullying specialist and a school safety team. These individuals must work to provide a safe and welcoming environment for all students. In addition, the first week in October has been designated as the “Week of Respect”. During this week, schools are asked to teach about intimidation and harassment in order to make students more aware of the causes and effects of bullying.
