Ultra Products, a division of the Systemax group of companies, is a US-based computer parts manufacturer, importer and distributor.
The company's main focus is on PC accessories, and offers a full gamut of products including computer memory, computer cases and power supplies, custom cooling solutions and uninterruptible power supplies.
The company attracted attention in PC publications when they produced the first modular computer power supply, the Ultra X-Connect.
The history of Ultra Products dates back to 1991 with the Fletcher, Ohio based PC builder, MidWest Micro. Ultra was the brand name for MidWest Micro's white-box personal and laptop computers sold through their Infotel computer product distribution division. In late 1997, Global Industrial Products purchased Infotel and the MidWest Micro and continued to sell product under the Ultra brand name. In 1999, Global changed its name to Systemax and Global Industrial became a division of the Systemax corporation. The Ultra Products brand name was expanded to include LCD monitors.
In 2002, Systemax was an exclusive U.S. importer of Chieftec brand computer cases. The cases were used for Systemax builds and to DIY users through Systemax's Tiger Direct retail outlet, but in order to move the quantity of product required to import to maintain exclusive distribution rights, Systemax would have to sell to other retails; retailers in direct competition with Tiger Direct. So later in 2002 ChieftecUSA was born.
In 2003, Tiger Direct used the Ultra brand to sell computer memory and low-end graphics cards. By mid-2003, the product line expanded to light kits, hard drive, memory and CPU coolers and flash memory card readers. This proved to be successful and the decision was made to put the brand out into the retail channel. It was determined to use the existing ChieftecUSA channels to distribute product, so in late 2003 ChieftecUSA became Ultra Products and could not only be purchased at Tiger Direct, but also Fry's Electronics, Micro Center as well as a number of other retail and mail order computer components dealers.
Although technical support is often handled through the Fletcher, Ohio facility, a number of support issues are actually still handled in the Tiger Direct call center in Miami, Florida.
In November 2006, Ultra Products received United States Patent Number 7,133,293 for the modular interface Ultra uses on its X-Connect line of power supplies. The patent was filed for in September 2004.
In August 2007, the technical support forums at Ultra Product's website was closed and a statement that they were "under construction" was made on the portal page, yet the link to the forums had been completely removed from the main page's navigation.
On April 4, 2008, Ultra Products filed a complaint against Antec, Inc., Channel Well Technology Co. Ltd., Channel Well Technology Co. U.S.A., Inc., Corsair Memory, Inc., Enhance Electronics Co. Ltd., E-Power Technology/PCMCIS, SPI Electronic Co. Ltd., FSP Group USA Corp., Koolance USA, Mushkin, Inc., OCZ Technology, Sea Sonic Electronics Co. Ltd., Silverstone Technology, Inc., Spire-Bytecom Fanner Corporation, Tagan Technology Co. Ltd., Tagan Technology Co., Thermaltake Technology Co. Ltd., Thermaltake, Inc., Topower Computer Industrial Co. Ltd., Topower Computer U.S.A., Inc., Zalman Technology Company Ltd. and Zalman USA, Inc. for patent infringement claiming that the defendant's modular power supply product infringed on the patent Ultra filed for back in 2004.
