Cognitive infocommunications (CogInfoCom) investigates the link between the research areas of infocommunications and the cognitive sciences, as well as the various engineering applications which have emerged as the synergic combination of these sciences.
The primary goal of CogInfoCom is to provide a systematic view of how cognitive processes can co-evolve with infocommunications devices so that the capabilities of the human brain may not only be extended through these devices, irrespective of geographical distance, but may also interact with the capabilities of any artificially cognitive system. This merging and extension of cognitive capabilities is targeted towards engineering applications in which artificial and/or natural cognitive systems are enabled to work together more effectively.
Two important dimensions of cognitive infocommunications are the mode of communication and the type of communication. The mode of communication refers to the actors at the two endpoints of communication:
Intra-cognitive communication: information transfer occurs between two cognitive beings with equivalent cognitive capabilities (e.g.: between two humans).
Inter-cognitive communication: information transfer occurs between two cognitive beings with different cognitive capabilities (e.g.: between a human and an artificially cognitive system).
The type of communication refers to the type of information that is conveyed between the two communicating entities, and the way in which this is done:
Sensor-sharing communication: entities on both ends use the same sensory modality to perceive the communicated information.
Sensor-bridging communication: sensory information obtained or experienced by each of the entities is not only transmitted, but also transformed to an appropriate and different sensory modality.
Representation-sharing communication: the same information representation is used on both ends to communicate information.
Representation-bridging communication: sensory information transferred to the receiver entity is filtered and/or adapted so that a different information representation is used on the two ends.
