A treenail, also trenail, trennel, or trunnel, is a wooden peg, pin, or dowel used to fasten pieces of wood together, especially in timber frames, covered bridges, wooden shipbuilding and boat building. The use of wood as a tenon can be traced back over 7,000 years, as archaeologist have found traces of wood nails in the excavation of early Germanic sites. Trenails are notoriously economical and readily available, making them a common early building material. Black Locust is a favorite wood when making trunnels in shipbuilding due to its strength and rot resistance and red oak is typical in buildings. Traditionally treenails and pegs were made by splitting bolts of wood with a froe and shaping them with a drawknife on a shaving horse. Treenails are cut from a single piece of wood and perform well because of the natural grain. The grain of the treenail runs perpendicular to the grain of the receiving mortises which adds structural strength. Treenails are typically 1.25"-1.5" in diameter and are hand whittled with rough facets. The mortise is drilled 1/16" smaller than the treenail to create a tight fit and take advantage of friction in the mortise. In cases where the treenail is 24 inches or longer, the treenail should be shaped 1/8 inch smaller than the other half. In the same case the mortise is drilled in two parts, with a smaller auger for the smaller part of the treenail and a typical auger for the standard part. Other trenails are tapered with the large end being 1/8" longer than the mortise. After treenails are hammered into the mortise, they can be trimmed, split, and wedged with a small piece of oak that increases friction force. As an alternative to the wedge, the treenail can receive a plug or a punch to the center the expands the entire circumference. While this method prevents leaks by reducing gaps, plugs and punches are more likely to fall out in cold temperatures. Ideally, the nose of the treenail is driven 4-5 cm clear of the timber before being trimmed. Unlike metal nails, trenails can not be removed or reused. As the wood shrinks or expand the fibers create a friction that interlocks it into the mortise snugly. If a treenail break or fails but the wood it is fasting remains intact the remaining trenail can be cut out and replaced with a larger treenail that fits snugly. In addition, treenails have the ability to move over time and retain structural integrity. Because both the mortise and the tenon are wood, the trenail does not stress the mortise to the points of failure during movement including seismic forces and grade settlement.
