The Architectural Technologist, also known as a Building Technologist, provides technical building design services and solutions and is trained in architectural technology, building technical design and construction. Architectural Technologists apply the science of architecture and typically concentrate on the technology of building, design technology and construction. They can or may negotiate the construction project, and manage the process from conception through to completion, typically focusing on the technical aspects of a building project. The training of an architectural technologist concentrates on the ever-increasingly complex technical aspects in a building project, but matters of aesthetics, space, light and circulation are also involved within the technical design, leading the professional to assume decisions which are also non-technical.
Most architectural technologists are employed in architectural and engineering firms, or with municipal authorities; but many provide independent professional services directly to clients, although restricted by law in some countries. Others work in product development or sales with manufacturers.
In Britain, Ireland, Sweden, Denmark, Hong-Kong (Chartered Architectural Technologist), Canada (Architectural Technologist or Applied Science Technologist), Argentina (M.M.O Maestro Mayor de Obras / Chartered Architecture & Building Science Technologist) and other nations, they have many abilities which are extremely useful in a technological sense to work alongside architects, engineers and other professionals - the training of a technologist provides skills in building and architectural technology. It is an important role in the current building climate. Architectural technologists may be directors or shareholders of an architectural firm (where permitted by the jurisdiction and legal structure). To become an architectural technologist, a four-year degree (or equivalent) in Architectural Technology is required, which can be followed by a three-year Master's Degree (or equivalent), with structured professional and occupational experience.
