The Cambridge Pre-U is a British school leaving qualification from Cambridge International Examinations that is an alternative to the current A Level qualification. It is a diploma-type qualification, principally aimed at students aged 16–19, and has recognition for university entrance.
The Cambridge Pre-U was launched in 2008 by Cambridge International Examinations in order to create a qualification which would offer additional depth in subjects beyond the standard A-Level syllabus. A number of independent schools such as Downe House School, City of London School, Charterhouse School, Cranleigh School, Westminster School, Winchester College, Oundle School, Christ's Hospital, Dulwich College, Shrewsbury School, Rugby School, Tonbridge School and Eton College have replaced A-Levels with Cambridge Pre-Us in some subjects. They are joined by grammar and comprehensive schools, and sixth-form colleges including Royal Grammar School, High Wycombe, Simon Langton Girls' Grammar School, Wimbledon College, Coloma Convent Girls' School, King Edward VI School, Cardinal Vaughan Memorial School, Harris Westminster Sixth Form, Watford Grammar School for Girls, Simon Langton Grammar School for Boys and Lancaster Royal Grammar School. A British school in Kenya, Hillcrest Secondary School, switched to Pre-U, making it the first centre for these examinations outside the UK. Over 120 schools offer Cambridge Pre-U and over 300 further schools have registered interest.
Winchester College and Charterhouse were the first schools to introduce the Pre-U across all major sixth-form subjects. The respective headmasters of both institutions, Ralph Townsend and John Witheridge, were key proponents of the Pre-U from the early stages.
As there are continuous reforms with British A-levels, some schools have not only decided to offer the Cambridge Pre-U as an alternative but to switch completely to offering solely the Cambridge Pre-U (or other exams such as International A-levels, the IB etc.) to offer students a more consistent education.
The Cambridge Pre-U is linear, like the UK A level (the international A level variant delivered by Cambridge International Examinations is also linear), and does not have any compulsory principal subjects as the International Baccalaureate does: students have a free choice of three such "Principal Subjects" out of 27. Additional subjects may be taken, though not incorporated into the Diploma. There are also 'short courses', consisting of one year's study, available in Modern Foreign Languages, Maths and Further Maths. Students who complete an "Independent Research Project" and a "Global Perspectives" portfolio in addition to the three "Principal Subjects" are eligible for the award of the Cambridge Pre-U Diploma.
According to the Cambridge International Examinations website of the Cambridge Pre-U announced that all the 'Ivy League' universities in the USA accepted the Cambridge Pre-U for the purposes of university entrance.
