Diane Marie Amann is the Associate Dean for International Programs & Strategic Initiatives & Emily and Ernest Woodruff Chair in International Law at the University of Georgia School of Law, where her duties include leadership of the law school's Dean Rusk International Law Center. Additionally, she serves as an Affiliated Faculty Member at the University of Georgia African Studies Institute. She is an expert on the interaction of national, regional, and international legal regimes in efforts to combat atrocity and cross-border crime, in areas ranging from counterterrorism measures at Guantánamo to international criminal justice efforts at The Hague. In December 2012, International Criminal Court Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda named Amann her Special Adviser on Children in and affected by Armed Conflict; in that capacity, Amann has assisted in preparation of the ICC Office of the Prosecutor's 2016 Draft Policy on Children.
Amann holds a Doctor honoris causa degree from Utrecht Universiteit in the Netherlands, a J.D. from Northwestern University School of Law in Chicago, an M.A. in political science from the University of California, Los Angeles, and a B.S. in journalism from the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. She served as a law clerk to U.S. Supreme Court Justice John Paul Stevens and practiced as a federal criminal defense attorney in San Francisco before entering academia. Formerly Professor of Law and founding Director of the California International Law Center at the University of California, Davis School of Law (Martin Luther King, Jr. Hall), she served as Vice President of the American Society of International Law from 2009-2011 and as Chair of the Section on International Law of the Association of American Law Schools from 2009 to 2010. She is a board member of the National Institute of Military Justice. She is on the External Board of the Transitional Justice Institute at the University of Ulster.
Amann is Editor-in-Chief of the American Society of International Law Benchbook on International Law (2014). In addition to her print publications, Amann has blogged at The New York Times' Room for Debate, SCOTUSblog, Slate's Convictions, The Blog of Legal Times, and The Huffington Post. She was the founding editor and contributor of IntLawGrrls, a blog that featured contributors from more than 300 judges, academics, students, and practitioners, from 2007 to 2012; subsequently, she launched a solo blog, Diane Marie Amann.
