Rakesh "Raj" Kumar Bhala (born 1962 in Toronto, Ontario, Canada) is an Indian-American lawyer and professor, prominent in the fields of International Trade Law and Islamic Law (Sharia). He is the inaugural Leo S. Brenneisen Distinguished Professor of Law, before which he was the Rice Distinguished Professor (2003-17), at the University of Kansas School of Law, and has served as its Associate Dean for International and Comparative Law. Bhala is the author of 74 articles and 13 books. BloombergQuint (India) publishes his monthly column on international law and economics, “On Point,” the first one of which appeared in January 2017, “The Trump Raj Begins … But How Will It Endure?”
In international trade law, Bhala’s Stare Decisis Trilogy was the first to highlight that, in practice, the doctrine of precedent operates in multilateral trade adjudication.
His Doha Round Trilogy pointed out that the detailed negotiating texts of the round had deviated from a key original purpose of the round: re-writing trade rules to help alleviate poverty, and thereby reduce the vulnerability of marginalized populations to Islamist extremist ideologies.
Bhala’s articles appear in general and international law reviews, and five are in The International Lawyer, the award-winning, peer-reviewed journal of the American Bar Association (ABA) Section of International Law, which circulates worldwide to over 15,000 readers. The Arizona Journal of International and Comparative Law publishes the annual WTO Case Review, which Bhala co-authored since its inception in 2000.
Bhala authored Modern GATT Law, the first major treatise on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade since the 1970 publication of The Law of the GATT (Kenneth W. Dam) and 1969 publication of World Trade and the Law of GATT (John H. Jackson). The Appellate Body of the World Trade Organization (WTO) cited the 1st edition of the treatise, and its 2nd edition received scholarly and media attention.
He also has authored the textbook International Trade Law, which has been cited by United States federal courts, and portions of this text were translated into Vietnamese. The latest edition, with the sub-title "An Interdisciplinary, Non-Western Textbook," is in two volumes, has been endorsed by 19 trade experts in 10 different countries, including Columbia University Professor Jagdish Bhagwati and Texas A&M President Michael Young, and been profiled in the media. Bhala’s monograph Trade, Development, and Social Justice, applies Catholic social justice theory to special and differential treatment rules of the multilateral trading system.
In Islamic Law, Bhala became the first non-Muslim American law professor to produce a textbook on the subject designed for English-speaking law students, teachers, and practitioners (Understanding Islamic Law (Shari’a)). He has spoken out against state anti-Sharia legislation, arguing it is unfair and bad for business. The textbook has received media attention, such as after the November 2015 Paris attacks, and has been reviewed as a "brilliant and much-needed resource". It is in its second edition.
Some of Bhala’s research is at the intersection of International Trade and Islamic Law. One article analyzes the tariff schedules of every Islamic country in the world, and points out few such countries use the GATT Article XX(a) public morality exception to ban importation of products, such as alcohol and pork, the consumption of which the Sharia forbids. Like non-Islamic countries, most of them impose tariffs on these products, possibly for moral, secularist, legal, or economic reasons.
Other areas of Bhala’s research are the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) and Indian trade law and policy. His book TPP Objectively examines the legal, economic, and national security aspects of TPP, arguing the deal merits a grade of “B,” and calls for stronger provisions to benefit women and their extension to the LGBTQ community. Via scholarly presentations and media appearances in India, he urged India to consider joining TPP. Speaking in Riyadh at the Council of Saudi Chambers of Commerce and Harvard Alumni Association of Saudi Arabia (HASA) in April 2015, he discussed reorienting Saudi trade law and policy toward the Asia-Pacific region. He addressed the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) Law Association of Malaysia, and justices from the Supreme and High Courts of Malaysia, in April 2016 on the topic of Risks and Opportunities with the Trans-Pacific Partnership for Malaysia.
He delivered a major address at the University of Pittsburgh School of Law in February 2017, The Legal, Economic, and National Security Dimensions of the Trans Pacific Partnership. He gave a Webinar for the Conference Board of Canada in August 2017, An American Perspective on NAFTA's Past, Present, and Future.


