Abraham Mateo Chamorro (born 25 August 1998), better known as Abraham Mateo, is a Spanish singer, songwriter and actor. He is known for his soulful and dance-oriented music.
Mateo was only seven when he began winning prizes on television shows and at the age of nine, he was awarded the Revelation Prize at Spain's National Music Competition for kids. For over three years, Mateo starred as a regular on children's TV show Menuda Noche, where he stood out for his strong vocal abilities and stage presence. Around age ten, he signed a recording contract with EMI Music Spain and released a debut self-titled album, Abraham Mateo.
He returned four years later with his second album, AM, on Sony Music Spain. The album showcased Mateo's growth as a performer and found him incorporating electronic and dance elements into his sound. With the single "Señorita", he made his breakthrough in the music scene, achieving a great success in Spain and Latin America. "Señorita" stayed in the Spain's Top 50 single charts for almost a year and its music video was the most trending music video of 2013 in YouTube Spain. In 2014 Mateo released his third studio album, Who I AM, which peaked at number one in Mexico and Spain. A fourth album, Are You Ready?, followed a year later, showcasing his own songwriting skills and a more mature style. Mateo's albums have received one Platinum and three Gold certifications in Spain. In 2017, he released "Loco Enamorado", an urban pop song, featuring Puerto Ricans Farruko and Christian Daniel, that marks Mateo's comeback to the spotlight. "Loco Enamorado" entered Billboard charts, Spotify's Global Top 50, and has been Gold and Platinum-certified in US, Spain and Latin America. He has revealed upcoming collaborations with Jennifer Lopez, Yandel, Austin Mahone and 50 Cent.
From 2014 onwards, Mateo has embarked on three concert tours across Spain and Latin America, delivering over 80 live shows altogether. Being so young, he sold out countless shows at major venues and arenas such as the National Auditorium in Mexico City, the Luna Park Stadium in Buenos Aires, the Caupolicán Theatre in Santiago de Chile, and the Sports Centre in Madrid. He was the opening act for the British boyband One Direction in Peru, Chile and Spain as part of their 2014's Where We Are Tour. Mateo has performed on the European Spanish soundtrack of several computer-animated movies and series including Frozen and Minions. He has appeared in small roles and cameos in TV movies and series broadcast in Spain and Portugal.
He has collaborated with numerous other artists, including Farruko, Pitbull, 50 Cent, Austin Mahone, CNCO, Ha*Ash, Lali Espósito, Carlos Rivera, Río Roma, CD9, Dvicio, Alejandro Sanz and Malú. Mateo has co-written many of his own hits with notable musicians such as Damon Sharpe, Poo Bear, Lindy Robbins, Lauren Christy, Eric Sanicola, Jacobo Calderón, Descemer Bueno, Mónica Vélez, The Jackie Boyz, Mario Domm, Jörgen Elofsson, Andre Merritt, Aris Archontis, José Luis Roma, John Reid and Talay Riley.
He has received four nominations for the Premios Juventud awards, presented by the American Spanish-language television network Univisión. In 2015, Billboard named him to their "21 Under 21's Next Class" list of "music's hottest young stars", and also placed him on their Top 10 young Latin acts list
