"Don't fuck with the formula" is a quote and subject of controversy attributed to the Beach Boys' lyricist and co-lead vocalist Mike Love circa 1967. Love called it the "most famous thing I've ever said, even though I never said it." It originates from a 1971 Rolling Stone magazine article written by freelancer Tom Nolan, in which business associate David Anderle reported disagreements from within the Beach Boys' circle. According to Anderle, Love wanted the band to remain profitable for himself—"and don't fuck with the formula." In the ensuing decades, the line has been repeated in myriad books, articles, websites, and blogs.
The remark is usually invoked to signal the conflicts that arose when bandleader and composer Brian Wilson began subverting the formula that brought the Beach Boys their initial success: songs with lyrics that embraced girls, cars, and surfing. The departure was represented by the band's 1966 album Pet Sounds and reached a tipping point one year later with Smile, which was abandoned and left unfinished. At the time, Anderle was a portrait artist and talent manager who Wilson recently befriended and employed as the head of the Beach Boys' new label, Brother Records. Anderle later said that his original statement about the "formula" was "taken slightly out of context", explaining that Love was not as concerned with the "artistic" side of business as he was with the "bottom line". On those albums, instead of collaborating with Love, Wilson sought lyrics from jingle writer Tony Asher and multi-instrumentalist Van Dyke Parks. According to various reports, some of which have been disputed, the band resisted the new direction and were worried that Wilson was going to break away as a solo artist. The band, including Wilson, were also anxious about whether their new "arty" approach would amount to record sales.
Love does not deny expressing reservations with the lyrics of Pet Sounds and Smile, but believes that the "formula" quote crystallizes a reductive "morality tale" that positions Wilson as "the tormented genius who was undone by his own family", a theme which appears throughout the writings of Wilson's "awestruck biographers". During the 1960s, "The Beach Boys" and "Brian Wilson" were synonymous entities, and Wilson was expected to fulfill the band's commercial interests. When he explored creative avenues that contrasted the Beach Boys' signature conventions, it was negatively received by fans and critics who wished that Wilson would return to the group's early style. This prevailing attitude changed after the 1970s, as rock music journalists started valuing the band's experimental work over their early records.
