VaR redirects here. For the statistical technique VAR, see Vector autoregression. For the statistic denoted Var or var, see Variance.

Value at risk (VaR) is a measure of the risk of investments. It estimates how much a set of investments might lose, given normal market conditions, in a set time period such as a day. VaR is typically used by firms and regulators in the financial industry to gauge the amount of assets needed to cover possible losses.
For a given portfolio, time horizon, and probability p, the p VaR can be defined informally as the maximum possible loss during the time if we exclude worse outcomes whose probability is less than p. This assumes mark-to-market pricing, and no trading in the portfolio.
For example, if a portfolio of stocks has a one-day 5% VaR of $1 million, that means that there is a 0.05 probability that the portfolio will fall in value by more than $1 million over a one-day period if there is no trading. Informally, a loss of $1 million or more on this portfolio is expected on 1 day out of 20 days (because of 5% probability). A loss which exceeds the VaR threshold is termed a "VaR breach".
More formally, p VaR is defined such that the probability of a loss greater than VaR is less than or equal to p while the probability of a loss less than VaR is less than or equal to 1−p. For instance, assume someone makes a bet that flipping a coin seven times will not give seven heads. The terms are that he gains $100 if it doesn't happen (with probability 127/128) but loses $12,700 if it does (with probability 1/128). The 1% VaR is then -100, because the probability that he loses more than that is less than 1% while the probability that he loses less than zero (which is impossible) is less than 99%.
VaR has four main uses in finance: risk management, financial control, financial reporting and computing regulatory capital. VaR is sometimes used in non-financial applications as well.
Important related ideas are economic capital, backtesting, stress testing, expected shortfall, and tail conditional expectation.
