Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) is a condition that results in the complete inability of the cell to respond to androgens. As such, the insensitivity to androgens is only clinically significant when it occurs in genetic males (i.e. individuals with a Y chromosome, or more specifically, an SRY gene). The unresponsiveness of the cell to the presence of androgenic hormones prevents the masculinization of male genitalia in the developing fetus, as well as the development of male secondary sexual characteristics at puberty, but does allow, without significant impairment, female genital and sexual development in genetic males with the condition.
Although all human fetuses, whether genetic males or females, begin fetal development looking similar, with both the Müllerian duct system (female) and the Wolffian duct system (male) developing. It is at the seventh week of gestation that the bodies of unaffected genetic males begin their masculinization: i.e, the Wolffian duct system is promoted and the Müllerian duct system is suppressed (the reverse happens with normal females). This process is triggered by androgens produced by the gonads, which in genetic females had earlier become ovaries, but in genetic males had become testicles due to the presence of the Y Chromosome. The cells of unaffected genetic males then masculinize by, among other things, enlarging the genital tubercle into a penis but in females it becomes the clitoris, while what in females becomes the labia fuses to become the scrotum of males (where the testicles will later descend).
Genetically male individuals affected by CAIS, however, will develop a normal external female habitus, despite the presence of a Y chromosome, but internally, they will lack a uterus, and the vaginal cavity will be shallow, while the gonads, having been turned into testicles rather than ovaries in the earlier separate process also triggered by their Y chromosome, will remain undescended in the place where the ovaries would have been. This results not only in infertility for a genetic male with CAIS, but also presents a high risk of testicular cancer later on in life.
CAIS is one of the three categories of androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) since AIS is differentiated according to the degree of genital masculinization: complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) when the external genitalia is that of a normal female, mild androgen insensitivity syndrome (MAIS) when the external genitalia is that of a normal male, and partial androgen insensitivity syndrome (PAIS) when the external genitalia is partially, but not fully masculinized.
Androgen insensitivity syndrome is the largest single entity that leads to 46,XY undermasculinization.
