Artist-in-residence programs and other residency opportunities exist to invite artists, academicians, curators, and all manner of creative people for a time and space away from their usual environment and obligations. They provide a time of reflection, research, presentation, production and immersion into a new culture. They often allow an individual to explore their practice within another community; meeting new people, using new materials, experiencing life in a new location and potentially integrating elements of that experience into their art. Art residencies emphasize the importance of meaningful and multi-layered cultural exchange and immersion into another culture.
Some residency programs are incorporated within larger institutions. Other organizations exist solely to support residential exchange programs. Residencies can be a part of museums, universities, galleries, studio spaces, theaters, artist-run spaces, municipalities, governmental offices, and even festivals. They can be seasonal, ongoing, or tied to a particular one-time event. They exist in urban spaces, rural villages, container ships and deep in nature. Hundreds of such opportunities and organizations exist throughout the world.
There is no single model, and the expectations and requirements vary greatly. The relationship between the resident and the host is often an important aspect of a residency program. Sometimes residents become quite involved in a community - giving presentations, workshops, or collaborating with local artists or the general public. At other times, they are quite secluded, with ample time to focus and investigate their own practice. Residency programs utilize a wide range of financial models. Typically, residency programs provide part or all of the required finances to invited guests, such as a place to sleep, meals, transportation, and a small stipend for incidental expenses. Less commonly, residents may finance their own stay, finding funding and support from their own countries and networks.
The application processes also vary widely; not all programs provide an open call for applications. Some opportunities are by invitation only, or are offered through special partnerships with other institutions, funding bodies, or organizations. Many times a residency experience is only the beginning of a longer relationship. Resident artists often return after their residency to complete a project they started, to begin a new collaboration, or participate in an exhibition, panel or workshop.
