Forward Commitment Procurement (FCP) is a procurement model that can be used to deliver cost effective environmental products and services to the public sector and help to create the market conditions in which the environmental goods and services sector can thrive.
The model was conceived and developed by the UK Government's Environmental Innovation Advisory Group (EIAG) 2003-2008) to address a key market failure identified by EIAG, namely the lack of market pull for environmental innovations.
The first report of EIAG  identified the Government as a key player in the environmental market, with a special responsibility as custodian of the common good to provide intelligent and effective supply chain management that could help to unlock investment in new environmental products and services.
As such, the public sector provides a lead market for environmental products and services, and this, coupled with the fact that the Government is a major purchaser of environmental goods and services, led EIAG to focus its activities on "how Government and its agencies can improve on the way they manage the supply chain in this sector" Jack Frost, Chairman of EIAG (2003–2008).

In essence then, our analysis turns the problem of innovation on its head. It is the lack of credible articulated demand that is at the root of the relative failure of innovation in the UK environmental goods and services sector not any lack of research, invention or innovative aspirations. EIAG believes the solution lies in Government taking action to mobilise the supply chain to deliver environmental innovations. And this means moving from a focus on R&D and technology push to a focus on intelligent supply chain management.

EIAG developed FCP as a supply chain management tool primarily for use by public sector policy makers and procurers, although the approach it is equally relevant to, and has been picked up by, private sector bodies such as the New Swindon Company in a project concerning innovative combined cooling, heat and power (CCHP) plant and services. FCP in fact mirrors the approach taken by businesses to stimulate suppliers to invest in new products and services to meet their future needs.

Private sector companies actively manage their supply chains by clearly articulating their future needs and providing a credible promise of future sales to provide security their suppliers need in order to make investments.

"The public sector, as both custodian of the common good and a major purchaser of environmental goods and services, is a natural lead market for environmental products and services. JERA have pioneered FCP as a practical mechanism to enable public sector organisations to fulfill this role, while at the same time delivering the cost effective solutions they need to pressing problems such as climate change and economic and social sustainability". Gaynor Whyles, Director JERA Consulting
The FCP approach has been well received:
• FCP was recommended by the UK Sustainable Procurement Task Force  and adopted by the UK Government in their Sustainable Procurement Action Plan [1]. • The Commission on Environmental Markets and Economic Performance called for the UK Government to scale up and replicate the FCP model in the public sector. • The EIAG FCP demonstration project (see below) was highlighted by HM Treasury in the publication ‘Transforming Government Procurement’ as an example of how innovation can be harnessed to improve services and value for money  [2]. • And highlighted as a best practice case study in 'Finding and Procuring Innovative Solutions, OGC/DIUS Report, 2007', [3]
