Jaime Lagunez is a scientist and activist included by Marquis' of Who's Who in Science and Engineering and Who's Who in the World. Currently doing research vs Malaria in Mexico using NGS Bioinformatics tools was Awarded “LEADER OF EXCELLENCE IN HEALTH in 2017” recognition by the AMES Excellence in Health organization he has been given expressed support by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the American Chemical Society and the American Physics Society. On the 89 trillion USD, dedicated to dealing with a damaging carbon economy, he has stated that it should be invested in more than that:  Currently the costs from environmental damage in lives, diseases and financial resources, calculated to be in hundreds of trillions of euros, are unacceptable. His proposal among other statements mentions that indeed, the ways of indigenous peoples are much more in tune with the environment should be incorporated in the project. Furthermore the need for infrastructure to deal with droughts and flooding are already a reality.
Promoter of the Consortium for Humanity project and World Medicine for the creation of more medical treatments. While he directed the coding of computer programs for modeling intramolecular communication  and microarray analysis., his group proposed treatments vs HIV and breast cancer. His PhD thesis with Edward N. Trifonov of the Weizmann Institute, presented a universal triplet periodicity of coding sequences pointing to extremely conserved ribosomal RNA sites. Lagunez has spoken in favor of protecting archeological, historical and environmental heritage in Mexico, especially in Cuernavaca and Teotihuacan. Since 2002, along with professors Neil Wollman and anti-apartheid activist Dennis Brutus, he worked in the Make TIAA-CREF Ethical.
In 2004 the organization Frente Civico, with which he collaborates received the National Mendez Arceo Human Rights Award for having protected civil liberties and the environment against repressive governments.
He has been scientific director of the Instituto de Criónica,.
As mentioned above, scientific organizations such as the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) the American Chemical Society, and the commission on human rights of the American Physics Society (APS), have expressed support, both for his social actions and scientific projects.
Currently he is advisor to National Institute of Health of Mexico and part of the board of directors of the National Prevention Science Coalition using evidence based scientific criteria to change social policy. He has also proposed a drug cocktail to stop cardiovascular endothelial cell senescence as part of the strategy of improving the health of the tissue during aging.
Economic degrowth and regenerative agriculture are ideas that are also promoted by Dr. Lagunez. Specifically he has said that the 5 trillion dollars used by world governments to subsidize fossil fuels yearly should instead go to the allowance of 1. Degrowth, 2 clean energy alternatives, and 3. regenerative agriculture which sequesters CO2 through mycorrhizae.
Considering the use of animals for food as cruel and being against the use of fossil fuels he promotes the home cultivation of the high protein high iron source cactus Pereskia aculeata. Very little water, no fertilizers or pesticides are needed to grow this vine originally from the caribbean region.
He has been nominated twice for Harvard's prestigious Gleitsman Award, given also to Nelson Mandela in 1994.
