Shahrokh François Shariat is currently professor and chairman of the department of urology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna General Hospital, Vienna, Austria. He is also adjunct professor of urology and medical oncology at Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, NY and adjunct professor of urology at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. He is currently standing visiting professor at the Charles University of Prag. He has published more than 920 peer-reviewed research papers (h-index: 80), >200 non-peer-reviewed research papers, and 18 book chapters, is the holder of four patents stemming from his research into prostate and bladder cancer, and is the recipient of various national and international rewards. He is the recipient of the prestigious Matula award from the European Urological Association in 2014 and the prestigious Gold Cystoscope award from the American Urological Association in 2017.
He is currently spearheading several collaborative multicenter groups (Bladder Cancer Research Consortium, The Bladder Cancer Detection Group, and The Upper Tract Urothelial Carcinoma Collaboration) and prospective clinical trials. He is a member of various academic societies and a journal, meeting abstract, and grant reviewer for numerous national and international organizations. He is an editorial board member of various journals including European Urology, BJU International, World Journal of Urology, Current Opinion in Urology, Immunotherapy, and Journal of Men's Health among others. His research focuses on urologic oncology - molecular mechanisms, markers, early detection, natural history, treatment, translational and outcomes research. Specially, Dr. Shariat's has been working on the discovery, testing, and validation of molecular markers associated with the biological and clinical behavior of prostate and urothelial cancers. His laboratory research focuses on integrative genomics and epigenomics of urothelial carcinoma with the goal of designing personalized therapeutic strategies.
