Hellenic Aerospace Industry (HAI, , Elliniki Aeroporiki Viomichania or ΕΑΒ) is the leading aerospace company of Greece. The company has undertaken over the years a great deal of subcontracting work with major International Aerospace companies (including Boeing, Airbus, Alenia, Lockheed Martin, Raytheon, EADS and many others) and has accomplished many original developments in military electronics, telecommunications equipment, night vision equipment, wind generators and composite material technology.
Original designs include a number of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (the Pegasus model), first flown in 1982 and still in service with the Hellenic Air Force.
HAI is located 65 kilometers north-west of Athens, with facilities covering an area of 200,000 sq.m.
Its industrial capability is organized by production centers geared to deliver high technology services and products in a wide range of activities, that include:
Military aircraft and engine maintenance, repair, overhaul, modifications, upgrades and logistics support
Development, design, manufacturing and after sales support of electronic, optronic and telecommunication products, satellite systems and applications, co-development and co-production of weapon systems.
Aerostructures manufacturing and assembly
Repair and calibration of precision measuring devices and equipment
HAI's Quality System is certified by BVQI, ISO 9001:2000, ISO 9001:1994 and TickIT Guide and EN/AS 9100. The company applies Total Quality Management and Six Sigma (6σ) methodology. In addition, HAI has been inspected, verified and accepted by nearly every major manufacturer in the sector of Aerospace Industries.
HAI has been approved and certified by the HCAA (Hellenic Civil Aviation Authority) as a repair center to provide services for Civil aircraft components and engines in compliance to JAR-145 requirements and by major engine manufacturers for the repair and overhaul of engines, such as T53 by Honeywell Aerospace, T56/501D by Rolls-Royce and ATAR K-50 by Snecma Moteurs.
Furthermore, it has been approved and certified as a maintenance center for the C-130 aircraft by Lockheed Aeronautics, King Air aircraft by Raytheon and P-3 aircraft by the Hellenic Navy.
