VS Hydro is a company developing hydropower projects Evolution
VSHydro traces its roots back to 1972, when Premasiri Sumanasekera, a graduate in Physical Science from the University of Colombo, who later became a renowned teacher and meteorologist, started Vidya Silpa in the backyard of his residence, essentially to manufacture laboratory science equipment which was previously imported at great cost from the developed Western countries.
Manufacture of these intricate measurement instruments were started with two artisans using basic equipment and technology. A special feature of these products however, were their extreme high quality – a feature that has characterized all VS Group operations hence and has become their watchword.
Soon the company grew from a backyard workshop to be the foremost supplier of laboratory equipment for all schools in Sri Lanka. The equipment manufactured at Vidya Silpa reached the highest quality standards and technological levels equivalent to their much more expensive European counterparts. The two man workshop in the Sumanasekera backyard grew to a large factory with 150 workers – replete with high quality plant and equipment required for manufacture of this equipment.
Time Line It has been a long and eventful journey, through times of political turmoil and financial uncertainty and yet VS Group has come out unscathed and stronger than ever, with honour and perseverance.
Projects: VS connected more than 100MW to grid in Africa (Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda) and Asia (Sri Lanka). They are exanding their operation in to other regions in Africa.
Uganda; 1. Mpanga Hydropower Project (18MW), Uganda [] 2. Siti(1&2) Hydropower Project (21.5MW), Uganda [] 3. Lubilai Hydropower Project (5.4MW), Uganda [] 4. Nyamughasani 1&2 Hydropower Project(22MW), Uganda. VS is doing pre-implementation works for some other projects which are having capacity over 5MW.
Rwanda; 1. Gisenyi, Mukungwa, Ghasashi (6MW), Rwanda []. VS is doing their pre-implementation works for several other projects in Rwanda including Rukurara, Mushishito projects.
Kenya; 1. Gura Hydropower Project (6MW), Kenya []. VS is doing their pre-implementation works for several other projects in Kenya including Nithi, Chania projects.
