The University of the Philippines Los Ba単os (also referred to as UPLB, UP Los Ba単os, or Elbi) is a public university located in the towns of Los Ba単os and Bay in the province of Laguna, some 64 kilometers southeast of Manila. It traces its roots to the UP College of Agriculture (UPCA), which was founded in 1909 by the American colonial government to promote agricultural education and research in the Philippines. American botanist Edwin Copeland served as its first dean. UPLB was formally established in 1972 following the union of UPCA with four other Los Ba単os and Diliman-based University of the Philippines (UP) units.
The university has played an influential role in Asian agriculture and biotechnology due to its pioneering efforts in plant breeding and bioengineering, particularly in the development of high-yielding and pest-resistant crops. In recognition of its work, it was awarded the Ramon Magsaysay Award for International Understanding in 1977. Nine research centers are recognized as Centers of Excellence by presidential decree. UPLB hosts a number of local and international research centers, including the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), ASEAN Center for Biodiversity, World Agroforestry Centre, and the Southeast Asian Regional Center for Graduate Study and Research in Agriculture (SEARCA).
In late 2015, as a testament of its leadership in agricultural education and development studies, the university signed a memorandum of agreement with Nagoya University to host the Nagoya University Asian Satellite Campus (NUASC) through the UPLB Graduate School. The agreement makes the Philippines the eighth country to host the NUASC through which the Transnational Doctoral Programs for Leading Professionals in Asian Countries will be implemented. It will enable Filipino doctoral candidates to enroll in NU doctoral programs without having to be physically present in Nagoya for the whole duration of the course. Nagoya's Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences and Graduate School of International Development will offer the doctorates in bioagricultural sciences and international development, respectively, through the said facility.
UPLB offers more than 100 degree programs in various disciplines through its nine colleges and two schools. As of Academic Year 2012-2013 the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) has accredited nine academic units as Centers of Excellence and two as Centers of Development, giving UPLB the largest number of Centers of Excellence (research and academic units combined) among all universities in the country.
UPLB alumni have been recognized in a wide range of fields. They include 13 scientists awarded the title National Scientist of the Philippines, members of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, the joint winner of the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize), Palanca Award winners, as well as political and business leaders.


