Asian Americans are Americans of Asian descent. The term refers to a panethnic group that includes diverse populations, which have ancestral origins in East Asia, Southeast Asia, or South Asia, as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau. This includes people who indicate their race(s) on the census as "Asian" or reported entries such as "Asian Indian, Thai, Chinese, Filipino, Korean, Pakistani, Japanese, Vietnamese, and Other Asian". Asian Americans with no other ancestry comprise 5.4% of the U.S. population, while people who are Asian alone or combined with at least one other race make up 6.5%.
Although migrants from Asia have been in parts of the contemporary United States since the 17th century, large-scale immigration did not begin until the mid-18th century. Nativist immigration laws during the 1880s–1920s excluded various Asian groups, eventually prohibiting almost all Asian immigration to the continental United States. After immigration laws were reformed during the 1940s–60s, abolishing national origins quotas, Asian immigration increased rapidly. Analyses of the 2010 census have shown that Asian Americans are the fastest growing racial or ethnic minority in the United States.
In 2015, Asian American earnings were found to exceed all other racial groups when all Asian ethnic groups are grouped as a whole.
Despite these factors, a 2014 report from the Census Bureau reported that 12% of Asian Americans were living below the poverty line, while only 10.1% of Non-Hispanic white Americans live below the poverty line. In actuality, when comparing wealth inequality between Asian Americans and non-Hispanic whites, Asian Americans suffered a greater gap between wealthy and non-wealthy Asian Americans with wealthy Asians making more than 168 times that of the money that poor Asians earn; this is much higher than the percentile of non-Hispanic Whites, proving that Asian Americans suffer from a tremendous wealth gap when compared among each other. Once country of birth and other demographic factors are taken into account, a good portion of the sub-groups that make up Asian Americans are much more likely than non-Hispanic whites to live in poverty. One source even quoted as saying that some Asian ethnic groups "have poverty rates that rival the African-American poverty rate."
There are major disparities that exist among Asian Americans when specific ethnic groups are examined. For example, in 2012, Asian Americans had the highest educational attainment level of any racial demographic in the country. Yet, there are many sub groups of Asian Americans who suffer in terms of education with some sub groups showing a high rate of dropping out of school or lacking a college education. This occurs in terms of household income as well, in 2008 Asian Americans had the highest median household income overall of any racial demographic. Although once you factor country of origin and the data of each specific sub group of Asian you'll find many of these sub groups have average median incomes lower than both the U.S. average and non-Hispanic Whites. In 2014, data released by The United States Census Bureau revealed that five Asian American ethnic groups are in the top 10 lowest earning ethnicities in terms of per capita income in all of The U.S.
