Water For People was founded in 1991 by the American Water Works Association (AWWA) as a response to the increasing global water crises. It is a nonprofit international development organization that helps people in rural parts of developing countries achieve greater access to drinkable and potable water and sanitation facilities. It intentionally works to accomplish the United Nation’s 6th Sustainable Development Goal: availability of clean water and sanitation and comprehensive monitoring of freshwater facilities for the progression of human health. They seek to address the issue of nonexistent and sub-optimal water and sanitation facilities across less-developed countries. With developing locally sustainable drinking water resources and sanitation facilities, Water For People also works to bring health and hygiene education programs to local districts. The non-governmental organization also works to empower and involve local governments, corporations, schools, homes, and individuals in the construction, financing, and maintenance of the water infrastructure. Water For People believes that access to safe drinking water and effective sanitation are basic human rights and not privileges. The vision of Water For People is a world where all people have access to safe drinking water and sanitation, a world where no one suffers or dies from a water- or sanitation-related disease. Around the world, 884 million people do not have access to safe drinking water and 2.6 billion are without adequate sanitation facilities. Every day, nearly 6,000 people die from water-related illnesses, and the vast majority are children. Other failures include broken pumps and filled latrines. Water For People promotes lasting programs that examine entire districts and regions rather than just households and villages. Water For People has established a year-round presence in 30 districts of nine developing countries, including Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Bolivia, Peru, India, Rwanda, Uganda and Malawi . Some of the districts include San Antonio de Cortés, El Negrito district, San Bartolomé Jocotenango, San Antonio Ilotenango, Santa Cruz del Quiché, Kicukiro, Rulindo, Gicumbi, Arani, San Benito, Cuchumuela, Villa Rivero, Kamwenge, Kampala, Lira, Masaka, Soroti, Chikwawa, Rumphi, Sheohar, many in West Bengal, and much more. In totality, Water For People reaches 4 million people.
Water For People attests that it stands by its values of accountability, responsibility, and transparency. Various sources, like Huffington Post and the Non-profit chronicles talk about it as an organization that says what it means and to means what it says, in backing up words with actions and carrying out advanced planning and execution.
