Inspiration porn is the calling of people with disabilities inspirational solely or in part on the basis of their disability. The term was coined in 2012 by disability rights activist Stella Young in an editorial in Australian Broadcasting Corporation's webzine Ramp Up. “I'm not your inspiration, thank you very much” is a 2014 Ted TalkxSydney led by disability rights activist Stella Young who began her speech by examining several instances in which people attributed inspiration porn upon her based on her perceived disability. Young challenges the use of inspiration porn by asserting that one’s disability is neither a “BaD” thing nor does it make an individual more exceptional than anyone else without a disability. She acknowledges this by stating that, “ I was not doing anything that could be considered an achievement if you took disability out of the equation.” This firm and forthright statement is supported by an in depth understanding from a disabled person’s point of view at how something so seemingly harmless from the outside can indeed be deeply offensive by members of the disability community. Furthermore, the noted advocate revealed a wide variety of inspiration porn memes, each of which portrayed how the spread of these images on social media platforms objectifies people with disabilities. She referred to memes with images of people with physical disabilities and captions such as “The only disability in life is a bad attitude” and “Your excuse is invalid;” ultimately blaming society which she perceived as the ultimate disabler for individuals like herself rather than the diagnoses themselves.
The 2016 TV show Speechless explored the concept in an episode where characters chose their hero for a public speaking contest. Season 1, Episode 12, JJ (Micah Fowler) and Kenneth (Cedric Yarbrough) talk to Ray (Mason Cook) about how people with disabilities are seen as "inspiration porn" for able-bodied people. When asked about what inspiration porn is, Ray states that, “It is a portrayal of people with disabilities as one dimensional; saying to only exist to warm the hearts and open the minds of able-bodied people”
