Greyfield land (or grayfield) is economically obsolescent, outdated, failing, moribund or underused real estate assets or land. The term was coined in the early 2000s from the 'sea' of empty asphalt that often accompanies these sites. "Greyfield" is a relative neologism as compared to more commonly known terms such as brownfield or greenfield.
The term has historically been applied to formerly-viable retail and commercial shopping sites (such as regional malls and strip centers) that have suffered from lack of reinvestment and have been "outclassed" by larger, better-designed, better-anchored malls or shopping sites. These particular greyfield sites are also referred to as "dead malls" or "ghostboxes" if the anchor or other major tenants have vacated the premises leaving behind empty shells.
Unlike brownfields, which feature actual or perceived levels of environmental contamination, greyfields typically do not require remediation in order to unlock value to an investor. The hidden value, in many cases, comes from underlying infrastructure (such as plumbing and sewerage, electrical systems, foundations, etc.) the presence of which allows a developer to improve the site efficiently through capital expenditures (sometimes quite minor) that may easily lead to increased rents and greater value. Other important potential qualities include parking, a central location, etc. may also be leveraged in a well-executed redevelopment of the site.
Some greyfields may also be considered favorable to investors because even if they are outclassed or physically in disrepair, they have revenue in place through long- or short-term leases. Greyfields with short-term leases may work well for an investor/developer who has a strategy involving intensive real estate asset management. By actively managing the greyfield in a short-term lease environment, rents may be increased after improvements are made.
The "greyfield" term may also be applied more broadly to urban infill or commercial locations where underuse or outdated (non-retail) uses hamper an otherwise valuable real estate asset. An example would be a formerly industrial waterfront site that is potentially valuable as a mixed use/residential site as it is being encroached upon by residential sprawl, or other economic or redevelopment pressures. In this example, the revitalization of the greyfield may require zoning changes and/or a public-private partnership of some kind to achieve the highest and best use.
