Late on the night of June 14, 2015, deputy sheriffs in Greene County, Missouri, United States, found the body of Dee Dee Blancharde (born May 3, 1967, Chackbay, Louisiana, as Clauddine Pitre) facedown in the bedroom of her house just outside Springfield, lying on the bed in a pool of blood from the stab wounds that had killed her several days earlier. There was no sign of her daughter, Gypsy Rose, who according to Blancharde suffered from leukemia, asthma, muscular dystrophy and several other chronic conditions, and had the mental capacity of a 7-year-old due to brain damage she suffered as a result of her premature birth.
The Blancharde neighbors, who notified the police after growing concerned about Facebook posts earlier in the evening, suggested Dee Dee may have fallen victim to foul play. They were also fearful that Gypsy Rose, whose wheelchair and medications were still in the house, may have been abducted and be in serious danger. Police found Gypsy Rose the next day in Wisconsin, where she had traveled with a boyfriend she had met online. She was alive and well, but "things are not always as they appear" the Greene County sheriff said the next morning. Public outrage that someone might have had taken advantage of a severely disabled girl to kill her mother gave way to shock, and some sympathy, for Gypsy Rose when investigators soon announced that the younger woman was, in fact, an adult and had none of the physical or mental health issues her mother had represented her as having.
Further investigation found that some of the doctors who had examined Gypsy Rose both locally and in the New Orleans area, where she and her mother had lived before allegedly being displaced by Hurricane Katrina in 2005, had not found any evidence of the claimed disorders and in one case suspected Munchausen syndrome by proxy (MbP). Dee Dee had changed her name slightly after being confronted by her family over her treatment of Gypsy Rose and her possible poisoning of her stepmother. Nonetheless, many people accepted her situation as true, and the two benefited from the efforts of charities such as Habitat for Humanity, Ronald McDonald House and the Make-A-Wish Foundation.
Dee Dee, who apparently did have MbP, had been making her daughter pass herself off as younger and pretend to be disabled and chronically ill, in the process subjecting her to unnecessary surgery and medication and controlling her through occasional physical and psychological abuse. MbP expert Marc Feldman says this is the first such case in his quarter-century of experience where the abused child has killed the parent. Gypsy Rose has pleaded guilty to second-degree murder and is serving a 10-year sentence; her boyfriend is awaiting trial on a first-degree murder charge. The case was the subject of a 2017 HBO documentary, Mommy Dead and Dearest, directed by Erin Lee Carr.
