15-Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (also termed 15-HETE, 15(S)-HETE, and 15S-HETE) is an eicosanoid, i.e. a metabolite of arachidonic acid. Various cell types metabolize arachidonic acid to 15(S)-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid (15(S)-HpETE). This initial hydroperoxide product is extremely short-lived in cells: if not otherwise metabolized, it is rapidly reduced to 15(S)-HETE. Both of these metabolites, depending on the cell type which forms them, can be further metabolized to 15-oxo-eicosatetraenoic acid (15-oxo-ETE), 5S,15S-dihydroxy-eicosatetraenoic acid (5(S),15(S)-diHETE), 5-oxo-15(S)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (5-oxo-15(S)-HETE, a subset of specialized pro-resolving mediators viz., the lipoxins, a class of pro-inflammatory mediators, the eoxins, and other products that have less well-defined activities and functions. Thus, 15(S)-HETE and 15(S)-HpETE, in addition to having intrinsic biological activities, are key precursors to numerous biologically active derivatives.
Some cell types (e.g. platelets) metabolize arachidonic acid to the stereoisomer of 15(S)-HpETE, 15(R)-HpETE. Both stereoisomers may also be formed as result of the metabolism of arachidonic acid by cellular microsomes or as a result of arachidonic acid auto-oxidation. Similar to 15(S")-HpETEs, 15(R)-HpETE may be rapidly reduced to 15(R)-HETE. These R,S stereoisomers differ only in having their hydroxy residue in opposite orientations. While the two R stereoisomers are sometimes referred to as 15-HpETE and 15-HETE, proper usage should identify them as R stereoisomers. 15(R)-HpETE and 15(R)-HETE lack some of the activity attributed to their S stereoisomers but can be further to metabolized to bioactive products viz., the 15(R) class of lipoxins (also termed epi-lipoxins).
15(S)-HETE, 15(S)-HpETE, and many of their derivative metabolites are thought to have physiologically important functions. They appear to act as hormone-like autocrine and paracrine signalling agents that are involved in regulating inflammatory and perhaps other responses. Clinically, drugs that are stable analogs, and therefor mimic the anti-inflammatory actions of the lipoxins and drugs that block the production or actions of the pro-inflammatory eoxins may prove useful for treating acute and chronic inflammatory disorders.
