A tokamak (Russian: токама́к) is a device that uses a powerful magnetic field to confine plasma in the shape of a torus. The tokamak is one of the several types of magnetic confinement devices being developed to contain the hot plasma needed for producing controlled thermonuclear fusion power. As of 2017, it is the leading candidate for a practical fusion reactor.
Tokamaks were invented in the 1950s by Soviet physicists Igor Tamm and Andrei Sakharov, inspired by an original idea of Oleg Lavrentiev. It had earlier been demonstrated that a stable plasma equilibrium requires magnetic field lines that move around the torus in a helical shape. Earlier devices like the z-pinch and stellarator had attempted this, but demonstrated serious instabilities anyway. It was the development of the concept now known as the safety factor that guided tokamak development; by arranging the reactor so the critical factor q was always greater than 1, the tokamaks strongly suppressed the kink instability that plagued earlier designs.
The first tokamak, T-1, began operation in 1958. By the mid-1960s their performance had improved so much that an initial release of results in 1965 was largely ignored. Lyman Spitzer, inventor of the stellarator, dismissed them out of hand. A second set of results was published in 1968, this time claiming performance far in advance of any other machine. Recognizing these claims might be dismissed as well, the Soviet delegation invited a team from the United Kingdom to verify the result. Their 1969 publication confirmed the dramatic improvements, resulting in a stampede of tokamak construction around the world. The performance was such an advance that the US abandoned the stellarator approach and converted their latest machine to a tokamak.
By the mid-1970s, newer machines had reached all of the conditions needed for practical fusion, although not at the same time and in a single reactor. This led to a new series of machines in the 1980s, notably the Joint European Torus and Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor, with the explicit goal of reaching breakeven. They instead demonstrated a new series of problems that limited their performance and demonstrated that a successful machine would have to be larger and more complex. The designs would be so expensive that they could not be developed by a single country. After an initial agreement between Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev in November 1985, the ITER reactor effort developed, and remains the primary international effort to develop practical fusion power. Many smaller designs, and offshoots like the spherical tokamak, continue to be used to investigate performance parameters and other issues.
