The NATO Support and Procurement Agency (French: L'Agence OTAN de soutien et d'acquisition), abbreviated to NSPA, is the main logistics and procurement agency of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) and is the executive branch of the NATO Support and Procurement Organisation (NSPO), formerly NATO Maintenance and Supply Organization (NAMSO).
Until 2012, the tasks were organised with the NATO Supply Agency and other institutions. It has about 1200 employees in Luxembourg, France, Italy and Hungary.
On 1 April 2015, organisation and structure of NSPO and NSPA changed. This change marks the expansion of Agency capabilities to include all aspects of systems procurement from initial acquisition throughout sustainment.
The mission of the NSPO is to provide responsive, effective and cost-efficient acquisition, including armaments procurement; logistics; operational and systems support and services to the Allies, NATO Military Authorities and partner nations, individually and collectively, in time of peace, crisis and war, in order to maximize the ability and flexibility of their armed forces, contingents, and other relevant organisations, within the guidance provided by the NAC, to execute their core missions.
The NSPA brings the full spectrum of 21st century logistics and acquisition capabilities under one organisation to ensure NATO allies and partners can maximize the effectiveness of their defence and logistics efforts. From acquisition and through-life support to system disposal and operational logistics support, NSPA capabilities, products and services offer integrated procurement and logistic solutions to support current and future national requirements to allies and partners. NSPA offers to customers the full range of design, acquisition, logistics and procurement support services for complete weapon systems across five distinct capability areas:
Systems Procurement and Life Cycle Management
Support to Operations and Exercises
Strategic Transport and Storage
Logistics Services and Project Management
Fuel Management
The headquarter of NSPA is situated in the town of Capellen, in the commune of Mamer, in south-western Luxembourg.
On December 16, 2016 the Chief Auditor of the agency, Yves Chandelon, was found dead in his auto. Medical examiners ruled it a suicide, but his family claimed the circumstances were "suspicious".
