Regunta Yesurathnam (16 October 1941 – 8 August 2011) was a Priest hailing from the Diocese of Medak of the Church of South India, headquartered in Medak, notable as a Systematic Theologian who served as Faculty Member from 1974 through 2001 in Secunderabad, Telangana, India at the Andhra Christian Theological College, affiliated to the nation's first University, the Senate of Serampore College (University) {a University under Section 2 (f) of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956}with degree-granting authority validated by a Danish Charter and ratified by the Government of West Bengal.
Yesurathnam has been acknowledged for his contribution to the disciplines of Dialogical Theology and Comparative religion and his works were listed in the Elenchus of Biblica (1987), an annual bibliography listing published by the Pontifical Biblical Institute, Rome, and his writings began appearing in academic journals that included Dialogue and Alliance (1987), National Council of Churches Review (1998) and the International Bulletin of Missionary Research (1999) and kept for posterity at notable libraries, which includes, the National Library of India, Calcutta, the Library of Congress, Washington D.C. and the New York Public Library, New York City.
Paul Arvid Sartison (2008) who researched at the University of Saskatchewan, Canada, using a Comparative religion approach to Avatara and Incarnation, puts Yesurathnam in the line of other notable Religions Scholars, namely, Edward Geoffrey Parrinder, Daniel Bassuk, Richard De Smet, SJ, Noel Sheth, and Julius J. Lipner.
As a pupil of the Systematic Theologian Joshua Russell Chandran, CSI under whom he was groomed in the sixties, Yesurathnam established himself as a Scholar and during the subsequent decade, as evidenced by his interest in Dialogical Theology, Yesurathnam seemed to have been influenced by the Religions Scholars, Stanley Jedidiah Samartha, CSI, Herbert Jai Singh, MCI and David C. Scott, MCI. During the initial years of his doctoral research in the seventies, it was Arvind P. Nirmal, CNI (the proponent of Dalit theology) who supervised and enabled Yesurathnam to push through his doctoral studies.
Ever since his Youth, Yesurathnam was inspired by the work of the Christian missions in Telangana, undertaken together by the Roman Catholic missionaries and the Protestant missionaries and the selfless lives they led and avowed to live for Christ his entire life and entered the ministry of the Church through the Diocese of Medak, established by the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society (that later on united with other Church Societies to form the Church of South India in 1947) becoming a ministerial candidate during the bishopric of Frank Whittaker, the first Bishop - in - Medak stepping into the portals of a Seminary in Bangalore for spiritual formation and ordained in 1967 by Bishop Eber Priestley, then Bishop - in - Medak and led the life of a Priest for nearly half-a-century that ended in 2011 on account of his sudden death.
