Media Preservation Foundation is a United States 501(c)(3) non-profit organization dedicated to the archival of media history mainly aimed towards Radio and Television ID Jingles and associated items. It was established in 1994 by Tracy E. Carman and Donald Worsham as an archive for documents and important recordings related to the broadcasting industry.
The Foundation has managed to acquire a large collection of items from both current and defunct producers including TM Studios, PAMS, JAM Creative Productions, Johnson & Siday, Futuresonic, FairWest, Wm Meeks Productions, Johnny Mann, Music Makers, Pepper/Tanner, Media General, Jodie Lyons (a/k/a Joseph Callaway Lyons - b.1/3/1930 Jacksonville, FL - d.1/10/2011 Georgetown TX), Tom Merriman, Tony Griffin Productions, Thompson Creative Productions and many others. It is the Foundation's goal to acquire as much of these materials as possible to facilitate the availability of these items for research and other purposes.
Media Preservation Foundation has also been known for providing materials back to media outlets, primarily radio stations, who are in the process of creating historic retrospectives of their history. Media Preservation Foundation aids those companies in the media that were not good at keeping copies of their own histories and materials.
In addition to ID Jingles, the foundation has a large collection of archives for CBS Radio's WTIC Radio in Hartford, Connecticut; Clear Channel's WHYN Radio in Springfield, Massachusetts and many others. The Foundation has also acquired materials from private collectors including the archives of the late Francis Holler, Jr. (a/k/a Frank Holler - d.10/15/2015 Newington CT)  in December 2015. Multiple warehouses containing thousands of reels, DATs CDs, Cassettes and even transcription disks is maintained by the Foundation in Indian Orchard, Springfield, Massachusetts. Some Foundation archives are also housed in Northridge, California. Types of jingles preserved by the foundation also include Emergency Broadcast System jingles.
Media Preservation Foundation has published a definitive history book on ID Jingles called, The Hits Between The Hits: The History Of Radio ID Jingles. It is authored by one of the directors of the foundation, Donald Worsham.
