José Campos Torres (December 20, 1953 – May 5, 1977) was a 23-year-old Mexican-American and Vietnam veteran who was ruthlessly beaten by several White Houston Police Department (HPD) officers that subsequently lead to his death. He was assaulted by a group of on-duty police officers after being arrested for disorderly conduct at a bar in Houston’s Mexican-American East End neighborhood. The officers convicted for the death of Torres, at the state level, received minimal sentencing; 1 year probation and a $1 fine. Torres' murder and sentencing sparked community outrage and lead to multiple community protests, with one gathering escalating to a riot. His death lead to advocacy non-profits and HPD official's negotiations leading to the addition of policies addressing police-community racial relations.
After Torres’ arrest at the bar, the officers took him to the city jail for booking. But, he was struck so brutally that authorities refused to book him into the jail. Instead the police officers were ordered, by a supervisor, to take Torres to a local hospital for immediate medical treatment. The officers did not comply with the supervisor’s order. Three days later, on Mother’s Day, Sunday, May 8, 1977 his dead body was found severely beaten and floating in the Buffalo Bayou, a creek on the outskirts of downtown Houston.
Terry W. Denson and Steven Orlando two of the arresting officers were charged with murder following the discovery of Torres’ body. Three other officers were fired from the HPD by Police Chief B.G. Bond, but no criminal charges were brought against the fired officers. A rookie officer who was present at the scenes of Torres’ torture and drowning was a key witness for the prosecution. Denson and Orlando were convicted for Torres' death and found guilty of negligent homicide (a misdemeanor), sentenced to one year of probation and a one dollar fine. The all white jury minimized criminal convictions and sentencing sparked community outrage leading to multiple protests and the 1978 Moody Park Riot. The investigation of Torres’ murder proved controversial. Following the State of Texas convictions of the two former officers, the Torres case was reviewed at the federal level by the U.S. Department of Justice. Which led to three of the officer’s federal convictions, for violating Torres’ civil rights.
Torres’ murder received significant news articles across the country. Initially focusing on his assault and drowning, media attention later concentrated on the historic racism, weakness of HPD supervision and the reoccurring lack of state and federal investigations. His murder lead to the brief documentary entitled "The Case of Joe Campos Torres" covering the murder case and the history of police misconduct in Houston. A poetic song, by vocalist and activist Gil Scott-Heron, titled "Poem for José Campos Torres" was created reflecting the struggles of racism and police criminal actions.
