'The Well of Loneliness is a 1928 novel by Radclyffe Hall, which explores the nuances of gender and sexuality, questioning the rigid gender binaries in the 1900’s England through an exploration of the fluidity of gender categorisation. The novel follows the exploration of gender and sexuality of an upper class woman, Stephan Gordon. This questioning of gender identity and sexuality is explored from childhood to adulthood, covering the pivotal moments of puberty, for example turning eighteen and the expectations of marriage that come with this. As a child, Stephen desires to be a boy, and with age becomes an almost agender figure, not fitting into the rigid categories of gender presentation. Stephen develops what is dismissed as a ‘childish crush’ on the house maid Collins, with these crushes becoming more serious as she ages. These ‘crushes’ culminate in finding love with Mary Llewellyn, whom she meets while serving as an ambulance driver in World War I, but their happiness together is challenged by social isolation and rejection from the heterosexual community, forcing them to spend time with “our kind”, the small group of people who are also rejected from the heterosexual society (Radcylffe 345). The novel is problematic, as on the one hand there is a plea to God for the acceptance of the Lesbian population He has created, yet at the same time homosexuality is viewed as a sinful mark of Cain (Radcylffe 186). The nuances of this novel, given the period it was written in, means it both acknowledges the existence of homosexuality and its need to be accepted in society, while simultaneously, and seemingly juxtaposing, being homophobic in its portrayal of homosexuality as a curse and a sinful inversion.
Publicity over The Well of Loneliness's legal battles, culminating in it being banned for obscenity, increased the visibility of lesbians in British and American culture.[4] For decades it was the best-known lesbian novel in English. However, its role in promoting images of lesbians as masculine feels problematic, as it conforms to the “heterosexual matrix” ideology that in every lesbian relationship, one person is considered the man (Butler 72). This appears throughout the couples in the novel, with Stephen being the ‘man’ in her relationship with Mary; and Jamie becomes the ‘man’ in her relationship with Barbara. This is very heterosexualised, as the women with traditionally male associated names are deemed masculine, furthermore they split into friendship pairs based on masculinity and femininity, with Stephen and Jamie being closer friends purely based on their association with masculinity (Radcylffe 325). This heteronormative portrayal of two homosexual couples brings up the question as to whether this novel is a radical exploration of gender and sexuality, or whether it is an attempt to fit homosexuality into the neat boxes of the “heterosexual matrix” (Butler ibid).
