Assassin's Creed Unity is an action-adventure video game developed by Ubisoft Montreal and published by Ubisoft. It was released in November 2014 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One. It is the eighth major installment in the Assassin's Creed series, and the successor to 2013's Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag. It also has ties to Assassin's Creed Rogue which was released for the previous generation consoles, the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 on the same date.
The plot is set in a fictional history of real world events and follows the centuries-old struggle between the Assassins, who fight for peace with free will, and the Templars, who desire peace through control. The story is set in Paris during the French Revolution; the single-player story follows Arno Victor Dorian in his efforts to expose the true powers behind the Revolution. The game retains the series' third-person open world exploration as well as introducing a revamped combat, parkour and stealth system. The game also introduces cooperative multiplayer to the Assassin's Creed series, letting up to four players engage in narrative-driven missions and explore the open world map.
Assassin's Creed Unity received mixed reviews upon its release. Praise was aimed towards its visual upgrades, improved free-running and combat, customization options, realization of the setting, multiplayer-oriented format, complex protagonists and the design of the main missions. The overarching narrative received a positive response overall. The characters' development as well as the emotional heft and the moral intricacy of the story were praised. The largest part of criticism was drawn towards the game's lack of gameplay-innovation, unrefined controls, and numerous graphics issues and other bugs upon release. Because of the high amount of initial bugs, Ubisoft issued an apology, and compensation was offered.
Assassin's Creed Unity was followed by Assassin's Creed Syndicate, which takes place in Victorian England, and was released in October 2015.
