Criticism of Rede Globo refers to the extensive history of controversies involving the Brazilian television network and Brazilian society. The broadcaster has an unparalleled ability to influence Brazil's culture and to shape the country's public opinion.
The main historical controversy surrounding the television network and the rest of the Globo Organizations media empire centers on both the support for the Brazilian military government and the censorship of pro-democracy developments in its news broadcasts. The military regime, according to critics of the broadcaster, provided government concessions to Marinho family's media group and specifically to the Globo television network which had a very poor coverage the 1984 Diretas Já protests. The Globo network itself admitted in the Jornal Nacional 49 years later, pressured by the 2013 protests in Brazil, that the support given to the 1964 Brazilian coup d'état and the subsequent regime was "a mistake".
At the end of the 1980s decade, the network was again targeted by critics because of edits made to the pre-recorded television debates between the presidential candidates in the 1989 election. The edits to the last debate favored candidate Fernando Collor de Mello, who eventually won the election. At the end of the 1990s decade, the Globo Organizations faced severe financial problems and were bailed out by the government, even though it was strictly a private company. During this period the broadcaster utilized its influence in the political arena to change an article in the Constitution of Brazil, a change which allowed 30% of foreign capital investment in the country's media sector.
In 2002 the federal government offered R$280 million Brazilian reais in assistance to Globocabo cable TV company, part of Globo Organizations, by financing through the Brazilian Development Bank. The broadcaster was criticized again for its biased coverage of the 2006 and 2010 elections. More recently, it was revealed that Globo Organizations had issues with the Brazilian revenue service. Between 2010 and 2012 the conglomerate was cited 776 times for tax evasion.
