Persona is a 1966 Swedish psychological drama film, written and directed by Ingmar Bergman and starring Bibi Andersson and Liv Ullmann. The story revolves around a young nurse named Alma (Andersson), and her patient: well-known stage actress Elisabet Vogler (Ullmann), who has suddenly stopped speaking. They move to a cottage, where Alma cares for Elisabet, confides in her and begins having trouble distinguishing herself from her patient.
With elements of psychological horror, Persona has been the subject of considerable analysis, interpretation and debate. The film, with themes of duality, insanity and personal identity, has been interpreted as depicting the Jungian theory of persona and explores cinema, vampire mythology, lesbianism, motherhood, abortion and other subjects. The experimental style of its prologue and storytelling has also been noted. The enigmatic film has been called the Mount Everest of cinematic analysis; according to film historian Peter Cowie, "Everything one says about Persona may be contradicted; the opposite will also be true".
Bergman wrote Persona with Ullmann and Andersson in mind for the lead roles and the idea of exploring their identities, and shot the film in Stockholm and Fårö in 1965. In production, the filmmakers experimented with effects, using smoke and a mirror to frame one scene and combining the lead characters' faces in post-production for one shot. Andersson defended a sexually-explicit monologue in the screenplay, and rewrote portions of it.
When Persona was released, it was edited because of its controversial subject matter. The film received positive reviews, with Swedish media coining the word Person(a)kult to describe its enthusiastic admirers. It won the Best Film award at the 4th Guldbagge Awards, and was Sweden's entry for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. In English-language restorations, the censored content was reinstated in 2001. Many critics consider Persona one of the greatest films ever made, and it was ranked the fifth-best in Sight & Sound's 1972 poll and 17th in 2012. It also influenced many later directors, including Robert Altman and David Lynch.
