Chinawal is a village in the Jalgaon district of Maharashtra state, India. It is situated at the foothills of the Satpura range in a generally hot and dry climate. The densely populated village is surrounded by the flat land and nutrient-rich black soil.
The flora and fauna of Chinawal have been impacted by the human habitation and cultivation of the land, but non-human life like neem trees, tree squirrels and graculas can still be found in and around the village. Using modern methods of the agriculture and agronomic practices, villagers of the Chinawal village have achieved a high growth rate of agriculture produce especially of bananas which is noted by the Government of Maharashtra and various other institutions.
Chinawal is also known for its educational facilities. It has Marathi, Urdu and English medium schools which offer education from the kindergarten up to higher secondary school, and which is facilitated by the students' accommodations and school buses.
Around 12 thousand population of the Chinawal village is connected to the outer world through a network of roads, cellphones, internet, cable and satellite TV.
The 'vangyache bharit' loving villagers also favor urad dal, shev bhaji, puran poli and kheer in their dishes.
Keeping pace with the changing times, the preferences of the villagers regarding clothes, entertainment and sports have undergone a sea change. The villagers now prefer shirt-pant instead of dhoti-kurta, and tamasha has been replaced by the Bollywood films, while cricket is more popular among the younger generation than the traditional sports like kabaddi and kho kho.
The multicultural society of the village - composed of Hindus and Muslims - celebrates all the festivals with religious fervor. The villagers generally live in peaceful harmony with each other.
Situated in the region known as the Rishikas during the Ramayana era, the land of the Chinawal village has witnessed the rise and fall of several empires from Satavahanas to Holkars, and finally British Raj, to the fall of which Chinawal village has contributed by participating in the Indian independence movement.


