Headquartered in Singapore, Musim Mas (Musim Mas Group) operates globally across the palm oil business spectrum with an operational presence in 13 countries across Asia-Pacific, Europe, North and South America. The group owns one of the largest palm oil refinery networks in the world and is among the biggest players in the vegetable oil refining business. It also manufactures consumer goods in Indonesia, producing soap brands, and cooking oil brands such as Sunco. Musim Mas has a 37,000-strong workforce, supported by a comprehensive logistical network of chemical and costal tankers, barges, tugboats and bulk installations at major ports across Indonesia and other strategic parts of the world.
Musim Mas is the first company in Indonesia to attain the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO) certification, and its Executive Chairman sat on RSPO's first executive board.
The group launched a sustainability policy at end-2014, committing itself to the principles of no deforestation, respecting of human rights and social contribution to the lives of local peoples. Notably, Musim Mas is the only major southeast asian palm oil company to join the Palm Oil Innovation Group (POIG), which works to provide innovative solutions to the issues within the palm oil industry. They are also taking part in the fire-free alliance programme to work with local peoples to solve the issue to fire and haze which affects millions of people in the region annually. In 2015, Musim Mas collaborated with the International Finance Corporation (IFC) - part of the World Bank Group, to help small farmers in Indonesia to improve their farming and alleviate sustainability issues linked to oil palm small farmers' productivity and farming patterns.
Musim Mas Group is also taking active steps to reduce its Greenhouse Gas emissions by capturing methane gas – a waste gas which is 34 times more toxic than carbon dioxide –, and turning the gas into energy to power their mills and estates. The methane capture facilities (also known as Biogas plants) are fitted for all of Musim Mas' mills.
