Robert Greenwald (born August 28, 1943) is the founder of Brave New Films, a nonprofit film studio whose work is distributed for free in concert with nonprofit partners and movements in order to educate and mobilize for progressive causes. The work of Brave New Films has been screened over seven continents and viewed over tens of millions of times and counting. His most recent full-length feature documentary, illustrates the connection between gun industry profits and gun deaths in America. The studio is currently working with a coalition in California opposed to the money bail system with films like Debunking Bail Myths. Brave New Films is also continuing its history of political advocacy by presenting short documentaries on current events from a progressive perspective, e.g a piece on Donald Trump's cabinet picks.
With BNF, he has made investigative documentaries such as Uncovered: The War on Iraq (2004), Outfoxed: Rupert Murdoch's War on Journalism (2004), Wal-Mart: The High Cost of Low Price (2005), Iraq for Sale: The War Profiteers (2006), Rethink Afghanistan (2009), Koch Brothers Exposed (2012), and War on Whistleblowers (2013), as well as many short investigative films and internet campaigns. His eighth feature-length documentary, Unmanned: America's Drone Wars, was released in October 2013.
Other recent, issued based short-films since 2015 include: Racism is Real which shows the stark differences between life in America as a black man and as a white man; a series on how vulture hedge funds contributed to the financial crisis that has devastated health care and education in Puerto Rico a look at how the private probation system preys on low-income people in "To Prison for Poverty" and an animated short on the Treatment Industrial Complex  - the private prison industry's move to capitalize on the drive to end mass incarceration.
Before launching Brave Films in 2000, Greenwald produced and/or directed more than 65 TV movies, miniseries and films as well as major theatrical releases. His early body of work includes Steal This Movie! (2000), starring Vincent D'Onofrio as 60s radical Abbie Hoffman; Breaking Up (1997), starring Russell Crowe and Salma Hayek; A Woman of Independent Means (1995) with Sally Field; The Burning Bed (1984) with Farah Fawcett; and Xanadu (1980), for which he won the inaugural Golden Raspberry award for worst director.
His work has earned him 25 Emmy Award nominations, two Golden Globe nominations, the Peabody Award and the Robert Wood Johnson Award. He was awarded the 2002 Producer of the Year Award by the American Film Institute. He has been honored for his investigative film work by the ACLU Foundation of Southern California; the Liberty Hill Foundation; the Los Angeles chapter of the National Lawyers Guild; Physicians for Social Responsibility; Consumer Attorney's Association of Los Angeles; Los Angeles Alliance for a New Economy and the Office of the Americas.
