A digital omnivore is a descriptive term meant to capture the indiscriminate and seamless modalities that consumers use to access the World Wide Web. This cultural meme reflects "the popularization of smartphones and the introduction of tablets and other web-enabled devices that allow consumers to access media content through several touch-points during the course of their daily digital lives." As Mobile Web users increasingly own mobile devices, cross-platform multimedia consumption will continue to re-shape the digital landscape, both in terms of the type of media content they consume and how they consume it.
According to a new 2011 survey from comScore, "smartphones and tablets are driving nearly 7% of all digital traffic in the United States, with two-thirds of that growth attributed to smartphones alone." Today, half of the U.S. mobile population uses mobile media, up 19% in the past year to more than 116 million people. This growth is only expected to increase as 36.1% of Americans over the age of 13 now own a smartphone.
Digital omnivores are a global phenomenon driving 5% of all non-computer device Internet traffic in August 2011. Singapore leads the way at 7.2%, while the U.S and the United Kingdom both score 6.8% and Australia and Canada complete the top five global markets with 5.3% and 4.4%, respectively. Looking deeper into the 6.8% of non-PC web-browsing done in the U.S., we find that 64.4% comes from mobile phones, 28.1% from tablets and 7.5% from other devices such as game consoles and e-readers. This means that in the U.S. about 4% of overall web browsing comes from smartphones and 1.6% from tablets. While small, these figures point to the way people are beginning to toggle between devices across various day-parts.
An analysis of the way consumers in the U.S. viewed news content on different devices throughout the day demonstrates the influence devices have on the way people consume content. On a typical weekend morning digital omnivores access their news using their tablet, favor their computer during the working day and return to tablet use in the evening, peaking between the hours of 9pm and midnight. Mobile phones are used for web-browsing throughout the day when users are away from their personal computer.
