Minor Hotel Group (MHG) is a hotel owner, operator, and investor. It currently has 154 hotels, resorts, and serviced suites in 22 countries across Asia Pacific, the Middle East, Europe, South America, Africa, and the Indian Ocean. The hotel group operates as a subsidiary of Minor International PCL, one of the largest hospitality and leisure companies in the Asia Pacific region. The group operates hotels under the brands of Anantara Hotels Resorts, and Spas, AVANI Hotels & Resorts, PER AQUUM Hotels & Resorts, Tivoli Hotels & Resorts, Oaks Hotels & Resorts, Elewana Collection, Marriott Hotels & Resorts, Four Seasons Hotels and Resorts, St. Regis, and Minor International.
US-born businessman William Heinecke founded the group in 1978 with opening of the Royal Garden Resort in Pattaya (later rebranded as the Pattaya Marriott Resort & Spa). Royal Garden Resorts was listed on the Stock Exchange of Thailand in 1988.
The first property of the group's brand, Anantara Hotels, Resorts, & Spas, opened in the Thai seaside town of Hua Hin in 2001. When the brand celebrated its 15th anniversary on 4 March 2016, it had 35 hotels and resorts across Asia, the Middle East, the Indian Ocean, and Africa. (22)
Launched in 2010 under the Anantara brand, Anantara Vacation Club is a collection of luxurious shared-ownership villas and apartments located in a variety of resort destinations for the use of its owners. Current properties include Koh Samui, Phuket, Chiang Mai, Bangkok, Bali, Queenstown - New Zealand, Sanya and Dubai. (22)
The sister brand of Anantara, AVANI Hotels & Resorts, was launched in 2012, and owns 14 hotels in Botswana, Lesotho, Malaysia, Mozambique, Namibia, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Vietnam, and Zambia.
In 2003, Minor Hotels launched PER AQUUM Hotels & Resorts in the Maldives. The brand has three properties: Huvafen Fushi and Niyama in the Maldives and Desert Palm in Dubai. The Huvafen Fushi Hotel by PER AQUUM is home to the world's first underwater spa, LIME. In 2014, Minor Hotel Group announced that in 2017 it will be adding a new resort on the Indian Ocean island of Zanzibar in Tanzania.
In July 2011, Minor Hotels acquired a stake of 34.4 percent of Oaks Hotels and Resorts, Ltd. Oaks is one of Australia's largest self-contained accommodation providers. Minor Hotels controls 54 percent of the Australian-based chain.
In 2016, Portugal saw its largest ever hotel deal when Minor Hotel Group acquired Tivoli Hotels & Resorts a hotel chain that owns 14 properties across Portugal and Brazil. The acquisition, which marked MHG's entry into Europe and Latin America, totalled €294.2 million.
In 2015, Minor Hotels joined with African luxury lodge and camp chain, Elewana Collection, to add six camps in Kenya to its portfolio.. The additions are the result of the acquisition of the Cheli and Peacock group of companies by the Elewana Collection.
