Institutes of Religion are local organizations that provide religious education for young adults (ages 18–30) who are members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). Local institutes may function in church meetinghouses, but may also have a stand-alone building situated adjacent to colleges or universities (especially those found in the Mormon Corridor areas in the Western United States and Canada). The LDS Church describes the purpose of the Institute program as "weekday religious instruction for single and married postsecondary students." Institutes of Religion are professionally directed as part of the Church Educational System, with responsibility for the seminary program and the church's higher education institutions, including Brigham Young University (BYU).
In addition to offering classes, Institutes often sponsor activities, such as dances, aimed at the needs of postsecondary students between 18–30 years old. Young adult church members are encouraged, although not required, to be enrolled in an Institute class whenever possible. In areas with a large LDS population, there are often special-needs Institutes that serve adults who have mental or physical handicaps. These Institutes adapt their curricula to meet individual student needs.
Among the standard Institute course offerings are classes on the Book of Mormon, Old Testament, New Testament, the Doctrine and Covenants, and other modern revelation. Institute classes are offered on campus at LDS higher education institutions, such as BYU. However, BYU students are required to take religion classes offered by the university. Students can transfer Institute course credit to BYU for a nominal charge and can graduate from the Institute program after completing 14 course credit hours.
The first Institute of Religion was established in 1926 in Moscow, Idaho, adjacent to the University of Idaho. Its first director was J. Wyley Sessions. As of 2013, the three largest Institutes of Religion are all in Utah: the Logan Institute, adjacent to Utah State University (with 6,833 enrolled); the Orem Institute, adjacent to Utah Valley University (with 7,081 enrolled); and the Salt Lake Institute, adjacent to the University of Utah (enrollment: 4,804). The largest enrollment outside of Utah is at Arizona State University in Tempe, Arizona. There are currently 350,000 students in over 2,500 locations.
