The music of The Lord of the Rings film series was composed, orchestrated, conducted and produced by Howard Shore. The scores are often considered to represent the greatest achievement in the history of film music in terms of length of the score, the size of the staged forces, the unusual instrumentation, the featured soloists, the multitude of musical styles and the number of leitmotives used.
Shore wrote many hours of music for The Lord of the Rings, effectively scoring the entire film length. Over 12 hours of the music (including various alternate takes) has been released across various formats. Shore conceived the score as operatic and antiquated-sounding. He made use of an immense ensemble including a large symphony orchestra (principally, the London Philharmonic Orchestra), multiple instrumental "bands", various choirs and vocal and instrumental soloists, requiring an ensemble ranging from 230 to 400 musicians.
Throughout the composition, Shore has woven over 100 identified leitmotifs, which are inter-related and categorized into groups that correspond to the Middle-earth cultures to which they relate, forming the greatest collection of themes in the history of the cinema. The music was continued with the music of the Hobbit films, the prequels to Lord of the Rings, bringing the theme count to 170 or more within over 21 hours of music, making it one of the biggest catalogues of themes in the history of orchestral music.
The score became the most successful of Shore's career, earning three Oscars, two Golden Globes, three Grammy, and several other nominations, and some of his themes (like the Shire theme) and songs earning great popularity. The score was voted for best Soundtrack in cinema history. The score was the subject of a short documentary film called Howard Shore: An Introspective, and has even earned a dedicated research-based book by musicologist Doug Adams. The scores go on being performed by choirs and orchestras around the world as symphony pieces, concert suites and live to-projection concerts.
