The 57th Dynasty (often known as 57 Dynasty) is a British hip hop group from Brixton, London.
The band was active from 1997 to 2003, then re-formed in 2014 by its two founding members, Charlie "Parker" Bucknall and Marcus "Paradise" Dawes. This eight-man collective, described by Rago Magazine as a "super group," won Best UK Hip Hop Act at the UK Hip Hop Awards and was nominated for both MOBO and Urban Music Awards. Through their indie imprint, FAS FWD Entertainments LTD, the group independently manufactured, produced and distributed music that included: one mixtape, two studio albums, and several EPs, dubplates, and singles. They have been compared favorably to the Wu-Tang Clan. The group has collaborated on recordings and live shows with a wide variety of artists in many musical genres. The 57th Dynasty's original musical style was a mixture of hip hop, bashment, jungle, jazz and spoken word components commonly associated with an early form of grime. NME once described the group's live performance as "a holy chaos with hot-lead hip-hop at its core."
The 57th Dynasty were among the vanguard of the British urban music movement of acts that became popular internationally during the early to mid-2000s. They were at first noted for their infamous hometown of Brixton just as much as much as for their music. The group is now identified with the youthful and rebellious countercultures of hip hop and grime. The group toured both nationally and internationally alongside Eminem, Outkast, DMX, The Roots, Wu-Tang, Common, The Lox, Sean Paul, D12, The Liks, Eve, Jurassic 5, Slum Village, Roni Size, Roots Manuva, Rodney P, Ty, Blak Twang, Klashnekoff, Mark B & Blade and more.
The 57th Dynasty first gained acclaim with their independent debut album The Spoken Word. With no major label backing, the group sold CDs on street corners and out of their cars. Recognized as a landmark album, its singles "Lil Bro," "Love of Hip Hop," "Still I Rise," and "Boro 6" were mainstays on underground pirate radio stations. However it wasn't until BBC Radio 1 DJ Tim Westwood began championing their music that the group catapulted into the national spotlight. Within months of the album's release, John Knight of Southern Record Distributors (SRD) invited The 57th Dynasty to join SRD's roster. "Buyers at chain retailers began calling for stock [of the album] even before a distribution deal through London-based SRD was secured" wrote Billboard.
Following the success of The Spoken Word, and with the emergence of grime music, The 57th Dynasty's second album, Boro 6 Vol. 2 – A Dynasty Truly Like No Other, served as a showcase platform for the talents of other British artists and styles of music. The collaboration-rich album's lead single, "Break Free", featured then-unsigned R&B singer, Estelle. Billboard praised the track for "going against the grain of what's currently popular in terms of subject matter." The 57th Dynasty became the first UK hip hop group to be featured in The Source Magazine. The group was highly influential in shaping the landscape of British urban music, not only for rivaling major labels, but for sitting alongside and influencing policy makers and representatives from media companies. Group member Oshin (Da Nomad) extensively showcased UK talent through his Fab 5 Freddy-esque film series, Independent Hype. At the height of their popularity, the group faced a wave of backlash from Anglo-centric blogs and forums, which sought to discredit the group as sounding too American as a result of lead vocalist Paradise having spent 18 years living in the United States. The band's final album together, The DIY Ethic, was never released. Band member 50:50 (Carl Fearon) died in 2008. In 2009, The 57th Dynasty were included as pioneers in HOMEGROWN! The Story of UK HIP-HOP Exhibition at Urbis, Manchester. Group members Marcus "Paradise" Dawes, Charlie Parker, Oshin and Shineye remain active within the music industry.
