Peter Taylor-Gooby OBE is a Professor of Social Policy at the University of Kent who is internationally noted for his work on new social risks, an area of study he helped create and develop. He has published more than 130 articles, 100 book chapters and 22 books.
He has led major European and UK Research Programmes which have opened up new areas in social policy research and has advised the UK government and the European government in relation to welfare reform and building public trust. His work is widely recognised across Europe and in East Asia. He has had considerable influence on the study of social and public policy in the UK and internationally and has been recognised by a number of external bodies, including 'Who's Who' and was elected a Fellow of the British Academy, one of only six academics in his discipline to receive this honour.
He chairs the British Academy New Paradigms in Public Policy Programme, 2009–11 and the Nudge: Scope and Limitations of Behavioural Economics Project, and directed the ESRC Social Contexts and Responses to Risk, and Economic Beliefs and Behaviour Programmes, and the EU Welfare Reform and the Management of Societal Change Programme. As mentioned he is a Fellow of the British Academy, a Founding Academician at the Academy of Social Sciences and a Fellow of the RSA. He participated in the Prime Minister's No 10 'progressive consensus' Round Table and was an Advisor to Prime Minister's Strategy Unit 2009–10. He served as President of the Sociology and Social Policy section of the BAAS from 2005 to 2006.
He has been closely involved in research assessment and served on various ESRC, Nuffield, Joseph Rowntree Foundation and HEFCE Panels and as an advisor to assessment exercises in Italy, Canada, Norway and Hong Kong. He chaired the HEFCE Social Policy and Social Work Research Assessment Exercise Panel 2001-4 and the HEFCE Social Policy and Social Work Research Excellence Framework Panel 2010–15.
Taylor-Gooby was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2012 Birthday Honours for services to social science.


