Automated conveyor roller condition monitoring is an emerging field that has risen out of the need to make bulk handling conveyors more reliable.
Belt conveyor systems are widely utilized for continuous transport of dry bulk materials (i.e. coal, iron ore) over varying distances. A vast variety of industries like the mining, power sector, cement production, and bulk terminals rely on the performance of belt conveyor systems. Compared with other bulk haulage modes like the trucking and railway, belt conveyor systems provide many advantages such as a higher capacity, lower cost, higher efficiency, less human involvement and proven reliability (Roberts, 1981; Smith and Spriggs, 1981).
Along with the growing international trade in major bulk materials, there is an increasing demand for the transportation of bulk materials. Correspondingly, large-scale belt conveyor systems have been installed to meet the demand for higher capacity and longer distance application of continuous conveying of bulk materials (Harrison and Roberts, 1983; Lodewijks, 2011). 
The downtime of belt conveyor systems leads to stoppage of transportation of bulk materials, influencing subsequent material processing and production, and consequently causing serious financial loss. In a mining plant, for example, sixty percent of the plant downtime was attributed to conveyor problems (Steinberg, 1983). The downtime cost of belt conveyor systems may vary from one application to another. The financial loss due to the downtime of belt conveyor systems can be in a range of 100,000 to 200,000 Euro per hour, considering the loss of the revenue from material conveying, and shutdowns of subsequent material processing facilities (Lodewijks, 2015).

Conveyor production delays and reliability issues are generally a result of a failure in one of the three main components of a conveyor system. The belt, drives/gearboxes or the conveyor rolling elements. Of which – Conveyor idlers are the most numerous component on the conveyor system. It has been shown that conveyor roller failure in underground coal mines is the premier cause of fires. This presents a significant hazard to coal mine workers.
