Anti-communism is opposition to communism. Organized anti-communism developed after the 1917 October Revolution in Russia. It reached global dimensions during the Cold War, when the United States and the Soviet Union engaged in an intense rivalry. Anti-communism has been an element of movements holding many different political positions, including social democratic, liberal, conservative, fascist, capitalist, anarchist, and even socialist viewpoints.
The first organization specifically dedicated to opposing communism was the Russian White movement, which fought in the Russian Civil War starting in 1918 against the recently established Communist government. The White movement was supported militarily by several allied foreign governments, which represented the first instance of anti-communism as a government policy. Nevertheless, the Communist Red Army defeated the White movement, and the Soviet Union was created in 1922. During the existence of the Soviet Union, anti-communism became an important feature of many different political movements and governments across the world.
In the United States, anti-communism came to prominence with the First Red Scare of 1919–1920. In Europe, during the 1920s and 30s, opposition to communism was promoted by conservatives, social democrats, classical liberals, and fascists. Fascist governments rose to prominence as major opponents of communism in the 1930s, and they founded the Anti-Comintern Pact in 1936 as an anti-communist alliance. In Asia, the Empire of Japan and the Kuomintang (the Chinese Nationalist Party) were the leading anti-communist forces in this period.
After World War II, due to the defeat of the Axis powers, fascism ceased to be a major political movement. The victorious Allies were an international coalition led primarily by the Soviet Union, the United States and the United Kingdom, but after the war this alliance quickly broke down into two opposing camps: a Communist one led by the Soviet Union and a capitalist one led by the United States. The rivalry between the two sides came to be known as the Cold War, and during this period the United States government played a leading role in supporting global anti-communism as part of its containment policy. There were numerous military conflicts between Communists and anti-communists in various parts of the world, including the Chinese Civil War, the Korean War, the Vietnam War, and the Soviet–Afghan War. NATO was founded as an anti-communist military alliance in 1949 and continued throughout the Cold War.
With the revolutions of 1989 and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, most of the world's Communist governments were overthrown, and the Cold War ended. Nevertheless, anti-communism remains an important intellectual element of many contemporary political movements, and organized anti-communism is a factor in the domestic opposition found to varying degrees within the countries governed by communist parties.
