In investment finance, Private Equity Real Estate is a subset of the real estate investment asset class. More specifically, private equity real estate refers to one of the four quadrants of the real estate capital markets, which include private equity, private debt, public equity and public debt.
Direct vs. Indirect Ownership of Real Property Private equity real estate investing involves the acquisition, financing and direct ownership and holding of the title to an individual property or portfolios of properties, as well as the indirect ownership and holding of a securitized or other divided or undivided interest in a property or portfolio of properties through some form of pooled fund investment vehicle or arrangement. These typically can be structured as an individually managed (or separate) account, a commingled fund, real estate holding company, real estate holding corporation, actively managed real estate operating company or similar types of structures.
Types of Investors Investors in private equity real estate (as well investors in the other three quadrants of the real estate capital markets) include private accredited individual investors and institutional investors. (Institutional investors include any organization that manages money professionally for the benefit of third parties). <Institutional Real Estate, Inc.><The Handbook of Real Estate Portfolio Management; by Joe Pagliari.>
Individual Investors Individual investors include fully accredited investors who meet the minimum income and net worth requirements established by the SEC, and non-accredited investors who do not meet those requirements. Both accredited and non-accredited investors participate in direct investments in real estate, either individually or through non-securitized partnerships. Both also typically invest in the publicly traded, listed securities of public Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs), as well as various securities issued by other forms of publicly traded real estate operating companies. Except for a few exemptions, illiquid, non-traded private real estate securities offerings typically are suitable only for fully accredited investors. Accredited investors typically include moderate to high net worth investors who can satisfied the suitability requirements of these offerings. Private placements of real estate securities are exempt from registration with the SEC, and issuers of these securities are prohibited from making a general solicitation for these offerings.
Institutional Investors Institutional private equity real estate investors include pension funds, endowments, foundations, family offices, sovereign wealth funds, insurance companies, publicly listed or non-listed private Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs), and other forms of public or private real estate operating companies, among others. These investors either invest directly in real property with their own in-house staff resources or via investment arrangements or products offered and managed by third party professional real estate investment management firms, for a fee. In addition, privately held real estate investment and real estate operating companies also invest in the private equity real estate asset sub class.
Property Types. The most common property types are office (suburban, urban, garden and high rise), industrial (Warehouse Distribution, R&D and Flex office/Industrial space), Retail (Shopping Malls, Neighborhood and Community Shopping Centers and Power Centers), and Multifamily (Apartments - both garden and high rise)>. In addition, some private equity investors invest what they commonly refer to as [niche] property types, including hotels, student housing, seniors housing, self-storage, medical office buildings, single family residential homebuilding, single family residential for rent housing, manufacturing facilities, undeveloped land as well as other niche type properties.
Vehicle Structures Pooled fund investments can be structured as limited partnerships, Limited Liability Corps, C-Corps, S-Corps, Collective Investment Trusts, private Real Estate Investment Trusts, Insurance Company Separate Accounts, as well as a host of other legal structures. Funds organized to meet the needs of and attract the interest of tax-exempt investors typically are structured to satisfy the qualifications of Real Estate Operating Companies, or REOCS.
