Gardner Denver, founded in 1859, is an American worldwide provider of industrial equipment, technologies and related parts and services to a broad and diverse customer base through a family of brands. The company has over 30 manufacturing facilities located in the Americas, Europe, the Middle East, and Asia Pacific with offices in 35 different countries. Based in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA, it operates in three groups: the Industrials Group, Energy Group, and Medical Group.
The Industrials Group designs, manufactures, markets and services a wide range of products including rotary screw, reciprocating and sliding vane compressors, multistage and positive displacement, centrifugal and side-channel blowers, vacuum technology as well as mobile transport products. The end market sectors served by the Industrials Group are primarily industrial manufacturing, transportation, energy, mining and construction, environmental, and food and beverage.
The Energy Group manufactures, markets and services liquid ring pumps and engineered systems for power generation, environmental, petrochemical, pulp and paper and industrial applications; pumps and fluid transfer equipment used primarily in oil and natural gas well drilling, servicing and production, and petrochemical and industrial applications; and water jetting pumps. The Energy Group includes three divisions: Petroleum Pump, Nash, and EMCO Wheaton. The Petroleum Pump Division designs, manufactures, tests and markets a diverse range of pumps for the oil & gas industry. Nash is the leader in liquid ring vacuum pumps. The Emco Wheaton Division designs, manufactures and installs a wide range of solutions for the loading and unloading of almost any liquid and compressed gas products from river barges, ships and oceangoing supertankers. In addition, Emco Wheaton and Todo swivel joints, Dry-Break couplers and adapters, off-highway fueling systems and grounding equipment are all used within bunkering applications; the transfer of oil via hoses, pipelines, or loading arms for the purpose of providing fuel or lubricants to a tank vessel or nontank.
The Medical Group manufactures single-piece piston reciprocating, diaphragm and linear compressor and vacuum pumps, which are used in medical, environmental and laboratory applications.


