An Exhaust Air Heat Pump (EAHP) extracts heat from the exhaust air of a building and transfers the heat to the supply air, hot tap water and/or hydronic heating system (underfloor heating, radiators). This requires at least mechanical exhaust, mechanical supply is optional, see mechanical ventilation. This type of heat pump requires a certain air exchange rate to maintain its output power. Since the inside air is approximately 20-22 degrees Celsius all year round, the maximum output power of the heat pump is not varying with the seasons and outdoor temperature.
Air leaving the building when the heat pump's compressor is running is usually at around -1° in most versions, thus the unit is extracting heat from the air that needs to be changed (at around a half an air change per hour) . Air entering the house is of course generally warmer than the air processed through the unit so there is a net 'gain'. Care must be taken that these are only used in the correct type of houses. Many specifiers mis-understand that low heat loss means small. Exhaust air heat pumps have minimum flow rates that when installed in a small flat the air flow chronically over ventilates the flat increasing the heat los by drawing in large amounts of unwanted outside air. For most exhaust air heat pumps there will be a low heat output to the hot water and heating of just around 1.2 Kw from the compressor / heat pump process but if that falls short of the building's requirements additional heat will be automatically triggered in the form of immersion heaters or an external gas boiler. The immersion heater top up will be substantial and when a unit with a 6 kW immersion heater operates at full output it will cost £1 per hour to run.
A newer version from Nibe Sweden the F730 takes in additional air from outdoors to the above process - this is a more powerful type of EAHP with an inverter controlled compressor. Out put from the heat pump can vary from 1.1 to 6 kW and the discharged air from this unit can be as low as -15 °C
