Though Pneumatics is widely used in the industrial world, the traditional pneumatic technology is not free of challenges. Currently pneumatic control on machinery follows the pattern established years ago – a combination of valves or valve islands, actuators, flow controls and sensors along with the various connectors and accessories needed to make them all work together. In typical applications an average of 13 different components are required for each actuator function. The common issues with industrial pneumatic motion control are discussed below: Putting together a system from this many components builds in some inherent disadvantages and performance limitations. First, there are multiple components to specify, acquire, install, maintain and replace. All of this consumes time, space and money. Second, the actuator that moves the equipment and the valves that control the flow of air to the cylinders are often the last part of the machine to be installed. This means their placement is constrained by the machine design, resulting in inefficiencies and poor aesthetics. Third, all these multiple components must be connected, requiring numerous tubes and wires. This complicates installation and maintenance and multiplies the number of potential failure points. It also makes cleaning more difficult. Fourth, the size and complexity of the arrangement slows response times and wastes compressed air, increasing energy costs.
Clearly, an integrated unit that combines the components and tubing in one module would be preferable. In fact, the demand for this solution is increasing in the food and beverage industry where hygiene is paramount and equipment, including actuators, is subject to frequent wash down. However, other industrial applications are subject to the inherent disadvantages of traditional pneumatic designs as well. Prominent Companies in this field have designed a module that could integrate all the components, connectors and tubing required, and this is called Integrating valve. Generally, the unit comprises a cylinder, pilot and control valves, position sensors and speed regulators in a single Integrated Valve and Actuator Control (IVAC) element.
