Constantin I. Dobrescu, better known as Dobrescu-Argeș (June 28, 1856 – December 10, 1903), was a Romanian peasant activist and politician, also active as a teacher, journalist, and jurist. Active from his native Mușătești, in Argeș County, he established a regional, and finally national, base for agrarian politics. He is considered Romania's second agrarianist, after Ion Ionescu de la Brad, and, with Dincă Schileru, a revivalist of the peasant cause in the Romanian Kingdom era. Dobrescu was notoriously unpersuaded by agrarian socialism, preferring a mixture of communalism and Romanian nationalism, with some echoes of conservatism. Thus, he stopped short of advocating land reform, focusing his battles on democratization through universal suffrage, and on obtaining state support for the cooperative movement. He himself founded some of the Kingdom's first cooperatives, also setting up model schools, the first rural theater, and the first village printing press—which put out his various periodicals.
Although well liked by cultural and political figures of all hues, with whom he collaborated on various projects, Dobrescu's clandestine support for the concept "Greater Romania" made him a political liability. Technicalities were invoked to block him out of the Assembly of Deputies, despite his repeatedly winning in elections. Eventually, he served four contiguous terms in the 1880s and '90s, moving from alliances with the Conservative and Radical Parties to the position of an isolated independent, and, in 1895, to leader of his own Partida Țărănească ("Peasants' Party").
Dobrescu's nationalism and his association with ill-reputed figures such as Alexandru Bogdan-Pitești contributed to his marginalization, as did his reputation as a "carnival peasant", one who had backstage dealings with the establishment. Such ridicule and one public beating closely preceded scandals involving his financial misdeeds, alleged or proven. Upon the end of a publicized trial lasting to 1903, Dobrescu was found guilty of fraud, and emerged from prison after three months with his health compromised, dying in his peasant home. He remained cited as a martyr and precursor of agrarian and Poporanist movements, revived during the interwar. He was also credited as a forerunner of the National Peasants' Party.
