Kinfra International Apparel Park (KIAP) is located at Thiruvananthapuram (Trivandrum), the capital city of Kerala state in India. KIAP provides infrastructure and other related facilities for the garment manufacturing units. This park is operated by Kerala Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation (KINFRA), a public sector agency in the state. The KIAP is a fully owned subsidiary of KINFRA, a statutory body of Government of Kerala. KIAP has successfully implemented the Government of India scheme named "Apparel Parks for Exports Scheme". The Chairperson of the company is Dr. M. Beena IAS and the Managing Director is Mr. Jeeva Anandan.
Apparel Park provides world-class infrastructure facilities for garment manufacturing units. Human resources are highly skilled. KIAP is designed to offer you a swift start-up and problem-free functioning.
KIAP is now complete with all infrastructure facilities.
The infrastructure facilities include dedicated quality power supply, ample potable water, roads, drainage, security wall, administrative centres, canteen, Ware Housing, etc. BSNL exchange is established, which will facilitate connectivity
Facilities at a glance…

Well-developed plots of one acre (appx. 4040 sq.m) each connected with 14 metres wide road access.
Easy and attractive payment schedules.
Perennial fresh water supply.
Dedicated HT supply from the nearest substation ensure uninterrupted quality power.
Support services from small-scale industries - washing, embroidery, packing materials, etc.
Enclosed area with round the clock security services.
Common warehouse available inside the park for bonding/storage.
Common conference hall, office cubicles, etc available.
Common Effluent Treatment Plant is in operation. Capacity 750 M3/day.
Working Women's Hostel for 500 people.
BSNL commissioned dedicated telephone exchange inside the park.
Training Centre for fresh operators.
ATDC (Apparel Training and Design Centre) by Government of India for Training.
KINFRA Textile Centre, Kannur The new Textile Centre, developed by the Kerala Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation (KINFRA) under the Textile Centre Infrastructure Development Scheme at Nadukani near Kannur is all set to boost the textile industry in the district which has set a Rs 1000-crore target of exports. The Textile Centre, part of a planned Textile Town, is set up at a cost of Rs 45 crore, of which the State government’s contribution was Rs 20 crore. The centre hosts six main units, all linked to textile and garments production. They are:
A wet processing plant for dying and winding
A common effluent treatment plant
Bonded warehouse
Water harvesting pond
Hazardous waste treatment plant
A standard design factory
KINFRA would provide a ‘walk in and manufacture’ environment to entrepreneurs in the textile and textile-related industries sector at KINFRA Textile Centre. The dyeing and winding plant is set up at a cost of ₹ 24 crore, made available from the ASIDE scheme of the Government of India. The plant can process 15 tonne yarn and 70,000 metres of fabric a day. It is meant for the use of the units within the park but can be accessed to by outside units also depending on the availability of slots.
The park is set up on 124 acres.
