Kielder Observatory is an astronomical observatory located in Kielder Forest, Northumberland, England. It is situated high upon Black Fell overlooking Kielder reservoir near the Scottish border and half a mile up a forest track from James Turrell's Kielder Skyspace. The site was chosen due to its pristine night skies in a location free of light pollution  with clear views to all horizons and is one of the best places in the UK to view the Milky Way.
Open 7 days per week the primary function of the observatory is outreach. It plays host to numerous public events all which are accessible to all members of the public no matter their experience or prior knowledge. Each event consists of a themed presentation, tour of the observatory and tuition on using the telescopes by experienced astronomers. Should the skies be clear visitors are encouraged to make observations using the large-aperture instruments of fascinating astronomically-distant objects such as galaxies and nebulae as well as those closer to Earth including planets, the Moon and comets—a chance for everyone to engage in the Universe around them.

The observatory was officially opened on the 25 April 2008 by Sir Arnold Wolfendale 14th Astronomer Royal  and in its first year entertained approximately 1200 guests with numbers growing "astronomically" in 2014 nearing 20,000 visitors, thus making it one of the top tourist destinations in Northumberland.
The design of the observatory is in keeping with the ethos of the forest, not only in style but also being environmentally friendly—powered by solar panels and a wind turbine. This design is the result of a competition managed by RIBA Competitions which was won by London based Charles Barclay Architects. It won the RIBA Award  for its architecture in 2009 and also that same year a Civic Trust Award.
The observatory is administered by the Kielder Observatory Astronomical Society, a registered charity and comprising a board of Trustees, several permanent members of staff and a large group of enthusiastic volunteers all of whom help run the public events hosted at the facility.
