The Higher Education Commission of Pakistan (reporting name:HEC), is an independent, autonomous, and constitutionally established institution of primary funding, overseeing, regulating, and accrediting the higher education efforts in Pakistan.
Preceded by the University Grants Commission (UGC) in 2002 by a constitutional amendment, the universities were formerly accredited by the UGC established in 1947; the institution was revised 1974 and came its modern form in 2002 under the leadership of Prof. Atta-ur-Rahman FRS its founding Chairman, with additional executive reforms granted by the constitution. It operates directly under the Prime Minister and is not subservient to the Ministry of Education. Under a new and revised reforms, the HEC is made responsible for formulating higher education policy and quality assurance to meet the international standards as well as providing accrediting academic degrees, development of new institutions, and uplift of existing institutions in Pakistan. The major developments in the higher education sector occurred under the leadership of Prof. Atta-ur-Rahman, the founding Chairman, during 2002-2008  After Prof. Atta-ur-Rahman resigned in protest in 2008 due to the suspension of scholarships of thousands of students abroad by the PPP government, the university development programmes slowed down due to cut in budget and introduction of cumbersome bureaucratic procedures. HEC does not have degree equivalency criteria fully developed. Online systems do not work and no specialists are there to understand the degrees. People are working on multiple job roles. Procedure is very slow due to lack of knowledge and staff. New hirings without considering required experience has made it more difficult for HEC to handle matters more efficiently.
The HEC also facilitated the development of higher educational system in the country with main purpose of upgrading the universities and colleges in the country to be focal point of the high learning of education, research, and development. Over the several years, the HEC plays an important and leading role towards building a knowledge based economy in Pakistan by giving out hundreds of doctoral scholarships for education abroad every year.


