The High Line (also known as High Line Park) is a 1.45-mile-long (2.33 km) elevated linear park, greenway and rail trail. It was created on a former New York Central Railroad spur on the west side of Manhattan in New York City. Led by landscape architecture firm James Corner Field Operations, the abandoned railway has been redesigned as a "living system" that draws from multiple disciplines including landscape architecture, urban design, and ecology. Since opening in 2009, the High Line has become an icon in contemporary landscape architecture.
The park is built on the disused southern viaduct section of a New York Central Railroad line called the West Side Line. Originating in the Lower West Side of Manhattan, the park runs from Gansevoort Street – three blocks below 14th Street – in the Meatpacking District, through Chelsea, to the northern edge of the West Side Yard on 34th Street near the Javits Center. Formerly, the West Side Line went as far south as a railroad terminal at Spring Street, just north of Canal Street. However, most of the southern section was demolished in 1960, with another small portion being demolished in 1991.
The High Line was inspired by the 3-mile-long (4.8 km) Promenade plantée (tree-lined walkway), a similar project in Paris completed in 1993. Repurposing of the railway into an urban park began in 2006, with the first phase opening in 2009, and the second phase opening in 2011. The third and final phase officially opened to the public on September 21, 2014. A short stub above Tenth Avenue and 30th Street will open by 2018 once the first phase of the Hudson Yards Redevelopment Project is complete.
Its success has inspired cities nationwide to reimagine obsolete infrastructure as public space. Additionally, the project has spurred real estate development in the neighborhoods that lie along the line, and increased real estate values and prices along the route, the result of a "halo effect". As of September 2014, the park gets nearly 5 million visitors annually.
