Margaret Vivienne Calvert  (born 1936) is a British typographer and graphic designer who, with colleague Jock Kinneir, designed many of the road signs used throughout the United Kingdom, as well as the Transport font used on road signs, the Rail Alphabet font used on the British railway system, and an early version of the signs used in airports. The typeface developed by Calvert and Kinneir was further developed into New Transport and used for the single domain GOV.UK website in the United Kingdom.
Born in South Africa, Calvert moved to England in 1950, where she studied at St Paul's Girls' School and at the Chelsea College of Art. Kinneir, her tutor there, asked her to help him design the signs for Gatwick Airport, where they chose the black on yellow scheme for the signs after researching the most effective combination.
In 1957, Kinneir was appointed head of signs for Britain's roads. He then hired Calvert to redesign the road sign system and she came up with simple, easy-to-understand pictograms, including the signs for 'men at work' (a man digging), 'farm animals' (based on a cow named Patience that lived on a farm near to where she grew up), and 'schoolchildren nearby' (a girl leading a boy by the hand), using the European protocol of triangular signs for warnings, and circles for mandatory restrictions. The Worboys Committee was formed by the British government in July 1963 to review signage on all British roads.
In addition to her road signs, she has designed commercial fonts for Monotype, including the eponymous Calvert font, a slab serif design which she created in 1980 for use on the Tyne and Wear Metro system. She was awarded an honorary degree by the University of the Arts London in 2004.
She appeared on Top Gear on 3 January 2010 talking about the design process of the UK road signs. James May interviewed her in a 2009 Vauxhall Insignia.
In 2015 she was presented with the D&AD President's Award.
Calvert was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2016 Birthday Honours for services to typography and road safety.
