Karachi Development Authority (KDA) was established to develop Karachi under master plans. KDA was established in 1957. KDA owns undeveloped land in the city which it sell to real state development companies in Karachi.
Karachi Development Authority replaced Karachi Improvement Trust (KIT) that was disbanded by President Muhammad Ayub Khan in 1957.
The Karachi Development Authority was established by the order No V of 1957 signed by President of Pakistan General Muhammad Ayub Khan (Hilal-e-Ahmar) for development of the Karachi City and rehabilitation of the Refugees as well as Riot Affectees.
The Karachi Development Authority was successor of Karachi Improvement Trust and launched its first scheme at the junction of National Stadium & Karsaz in front of Agha Khan Hospital, Liaquat National Hospital & Liaquat Memorial Library known as Dhoraji Colony KDA Scheme 1-A. This area is considered to be the most posh area of the city of Karachi, having houses of the rich and wealthy. The area is also very expensive.
After improvement & development of its Scheme 1-A, the president has allowed him to launched town expansion scheme and The Karachi Development Authority has launched its first town expansion scheme known as Korangi Township, then Malir Town, Drigh Township, Malir Extension Township, Drigh Township, North Karachi Township, Old Nazimabad, North Nazimabad, Orangi Township, Baldia Township, Lyari Town, Hawksbay, Shah Latif, Mehran Town, Halkani Town, Landhi Industrial Area, Landhi Residential Scheme, Metroville-I to III, Gulzar-e-Hijri, Gulshan-e-Iqbal, Gulistan-e-Jauhar, Taiser Town, Korangi Industrial Area, SITE Metroville etc.
The Karachi Development Authority has also established Karachi Greater water channel scheme, Malir River Flood Protection Bund etc.
The Karachi Development Authority also approved the master plan for private housing societies in the territorial limit of Karachi City.
The Karachi Development Authority is also constructed the connecting road of town ships and main roads of Karachi City, such as MA Jinnah Road, University Road, Jail Road, Shahrah-e-Faisal, Shahrah-e-Noor Jehan, Shahrah-e-Orangi, Korangi Road etc.
The Karachi Development Authority also constructed the bridge over the Main road such as Jam Sadiq Ali Bridge, Super Highway Bridge near Karimabad, Nipa Chowrangi Flyover etc.
