Urban agriculture in West Oakland involves the implementation of Urban agriculture in Oakland.
Urban agriculture is defined by the United Nations Development Programme as "the growing, processing, and distribution of food and other products through intensive plant cultivation and animal husbandry in and around cities.” A more extensive interpretation, which considers multiple aspects of the practice is described by The Council for Agriculture, Science and Technology as "a complex system encompassing a spectrum of interests, from a traditional core of activities associated with the production, processing, marketing, distribution, and consumption, to a multiplicity of other benefits and services that are less widely acknowledged and documented. These include recreation and leisure; economic vitality and business entrepreneurship, individual health and well-being; community health and well-being; landscape beautification; and environmental restoration and remediation.” Urban agriculture localizes production and distribution of food, often with the larger goal of tackling food insecurity in a way that is environmentally and socially sustainable. In West Oakland, growing food on a small-scale, ecologically sustainable and socially-minded way is an effort to combat the Food Desert in West Oakland. West Oakland’s high levels of food insecurity stems from racial, ethnic, and socio-economic disparities- a history of poverty, unfulfilled industrialization, and environmental racism. As a result, urban agriculture is often connected to the larger movement for Food Justice.
According to the Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy, Food justice is defined as "the right of communities everywhere to produce, process, distribute, access, and eat good food regardless of race, class, gender, ethnicity, citizenship, ability, religion, or community.” Growing in an urban setting has become one of the most rapidly expanding forms of American agriculture. Research suggests that 60% of the world’s population will live in cities by 2030 and the question of how to feed populations that are historically removed from food production is becoming more important than ever. The FAO predicts that rates of urban food insecurity will increase as more people move into cities. Urban agriculture is one of the solutions to tackling the urban food insecurity crisis and a key element of cultivating food justice. When it comes to West Oakland, the struggle for healthy, affordable and accessible food as well as the push towards urban agriculture are closely connected.
