Chronicon Roskildense (Danish: Roskildekrøniken English: Roskilde Chronicle) a small Danish historical work, which is, except for few yearbooks, the oldest known attempt to write a coherent account of Danish history by a Danish author, spanning from the introduction of Christianity in Denmark to the author's own time. It is written in Latin.
The original chronicle covers the timeframe of 826 to c. 1140. A later addition from King Valdemar I's time, of a few more pages, takes the chronicle to 1157 when King Valdemar I gains the throne of Denmark; these additional pages are mostly direct quotes from other sources.
The author is unknown, but it is thought he must have had some relationship to Roskilde Cathedral, as he is very confident with matters dealing with Roskilde. Churchly matters are not of special interest to him; he writes vividly about all kinds of matters happening around him. Events themselves are only briefly covered while people taking part in them or even causing them are throughout covered with great passion.
Unlike Saxo's Gesta Danorum or Svend Aagesen's Brevis Historia Regum Dacie, Chronicon Roskildense often covers the 'losing' side in these very same events told by Saxo and Svend Aggesen. At times the author can seem very bitter and blinded by politic; however, this fact also makes this chronicle a very interesting piece of work.
The early part of the work is in many cases based on Adam of Bremen's Descriptio insularum Aquilonis, sometimes even direct quotes. The author only takes what he needs, however, and the meaning is not always the same.
As with many Danish chronicles, the exact time of writing is not known with certainty. The original chronicle ends very suddenly. Olaf "II" Haraldsen, son of Harald Kesja, is still alive as of the writing; he is killed in 1143. The last subject written about is Rike and Eskil's quarrel over the Archbishop seat of Lund in 1137 and 1138. With these in mind, the book must have been finished between 1138 and 1143.
The original manuscript is lost today and the chronicle exists now only in copies made in the 13th, 16th and 17th centuries.
Latin copies reside in:
University Library, Kiel, S. H. 8 A.8° (13th century). Known as Codex Kiloniensis.
Den Arnamagnæanske Samling, Copenhagen, AM 107 8o (16th century).
Uppsala University Library, De la Gardie XXV-XXIX (17th century).
