Ogechukwu Olufunmilola Modie (born January 12, 1976) is a Nigerian public servant who works as the Chief of Staff (an unconstitutional office) to the Honorable Minister of State for Petroleum Resources. She was the Chief of Staff (an unconstitutional office) to the former Group Managing Director (GMD) of Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC), Nigeria's National Oil Corporation. Subsequently, the GMD was named as the Chairman of the Board of the Corporation, as provided for under Section 1(2) of the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation Act of 1997, as amended on 4th of July, 2016. Her primary responsibility is the provision of administrative, organisational and advisory support to Dr. Emmanuel Ibe Kachikwu. She assumed duty in August 2015.
Prior to her present position, Modie was appointed by the Board of Directors of NOIPolls Limited as Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer in August 2012. Modie was featured in Business Day where she was referred to as "a dynamic woman with skills that show in the ways she carries out her work" and "the first woman to have headed Nigeria’s leading independent opinion polling and research organization". Under her leadership, NOIPolls grew in visibility across the West African region and the continent. The company won various awards; the Global Excellence Quality Award for the "Global Most Innovative Consumer Research and Data Analysis Company" for the year 2014 and the Pan-African Distinguished Achievers Awards (PADAA) for "West Africa's No.1 Opinion Polling Research Organization". In 2015, the company also won the African Quality Achievement Award for "Africa's Most Reliable Quality Opinion Research and Polling Service Provider", Nigerian Brands Organization's "Most Innovative and Impactful Market Research Agency of the Year-Platinum Award" and "Opinion Polling Company of the Year" by the African Development Magazine.
Modie has developed a career in corporate finance, SME development and finance, opinion research and now public service.
She is a member of ESOMAR World Research (Netherlands), a Distinguished Honorary Fellow of the Institute of Brand Management of Nigeria (FIBN) and a Fellow of the Institute of Credit Administration of Nigeria (FICA). In addition, she is a Class 2015 member of the African Leadership Network (ALN). ALN creates and strengthens relationships between these leaders to encourage intra-African trade, investment and collaboration. Modie was conferred with an "African Leadership Excellence Award" by African Leadership Magazine, United Kingdom Limited. She also received an Award of Excellence as "Exceptional Contributor to the Development of Economics" from the University of Abuja chapter of the National Economics Students Association (NESA).
