The Divjaka Karavasta National Park (Albanian: Parku Kombëtar Divjakë-Karavasta) is a national park in western Albania, located in the direct proximity of the Adriatic Sea within the Myzeqe Plain. The park encompasses freshwater wetlands, salt marshes, coastal meadows, floodplains, woodlands, reed beds, wooded meadows, pine forests and the deltas of Shkumbin and Seman. It spans a territory of 222.3 square kilometres (22,230 ha) and was established in 2007 to protect various ecosystems and biodiversity of international importance. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has listed the park as Category II. The Karavasta Lagoon has been recognised as a wetland of international importance by designation under the Ramsar Convention. The park has been as well identified as an important Bird and Plant Area.
The terrain is relatively sandy and consistently flat. Being one of the largest lagoons in the Mediterranean Sea, the Karavasta Lagoon is separated from the Adriatic Sea by a large strip of sand. Moreover, the lagoon was formed by the sediments of which has been discharged by the Rivers of Shkumbin and Seman. The lagoon is 15.4 km (9.6 mi) long and 4.1 km (2.5 mi) wide, but has a maximum depth of 1.3 m (4 ft). In the north, Karavasta is connected with the Godulla Lagoon through a sandy path and channels. Due to the proximity and influences of the Adriatic Sea, the park experiences mediterranean climate, with temperatures that ranges between 12 °C (54 °F) in February and 24 °C (75 °F) in August.
Even though the park is small in size and its mediterranean climate enables the presence of a wide range of animals and plants. Biogeographically, the park falls entirely within the Illyrian deciduous forests terrestrial ecoregion of the Palearctic Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub. The lagoons are abundant in algaes and dense phanerogam grasses. Most notable amongst them are the european beachgrass and wheatgrass. Most of the woodlands are covered by a mixture of diverse species of deciduous and coniferous trees, due to the lower river valleys and the sea coast, with species of stone pine, aleppo pine, white poplar, juniper and many various types of ash and oak.

The wealth of fauna is reflected in the list of many species and subspecies recorded to date, with 228 species of birds, 25 species of mammals, 29 species of reptiles and 29 species of amphibia. The park is quite rich of bird genera. Some birds found in the region are the gray eagle, spotted eagle, collared pratincole, pallid harrier, booted eagle and common goldeneye. The park is mostly noted for featuring 5% of the world population of the dalmatian pelican. The park's woods are important because they provide shelter for a large number of animals, including the red fox, golden jackal, roe deer, water buffalo, badger and weasel. The park provides important spawning and nursery habitat for economically valuable fish species that are exploited by a local fisheries cooperative. It is also known for the beauty of its natural landscape, its role in the local economy and its touristic appeal.
