English Botany was a major publication of British plants comprising a 36 volume set, issued in 267 monthly parts over 23 years from 1791 to 1814. The brief, but formal descriptions were supplied by the founder of the Linnean Society, Sir James Edward Smith. The work was illustrated and published by the botanical illustrator and natural historian, James Sowerby. It is generally more popularly (and erroneously) referred to as "Sowerby's Botany"
The full title reads; English Botany or, Coloured Figures of British Plants, with their Essential Characters, Synonyms and Places of Growth. The complete work comprises 2,592 hand-coloured, copper-plate engravings each with a single page of text, together with 36 individual volume indexes and a final comprehensive, 42 page, three-part final index issued in 1814 comprising, systematic, alphabetic and English names indexes including a six page index covering Sowerby's concurrent work "Coloured Figures of English fungi or mushrooms" (1797-1809) with five supplements to 1814 - the supplements not having previously been indexed.
While extensive, the work was never intended to be comprehensive; Smith would be the first to do such a survey with his first two volumes of Flora Britannica at the end of that century.
The descriptions given are accurate and systematic, in the use of binomial nomenclature, with Latin and English description; but a wider audience was intended with digression into general discussion and cultivation. Combined with increased sales of books, and the amateurs and gardeners enthusiasum for botany, the volumes were to become well known. Identification of the plants, in correspondence with the details in the plates, gave the work accuracy and utility beyond that of decorative books and more akin to formal botanical works.
Smith and Sowerby's partnering was not their only one, other early publication of Smith's descriptions with Sowerby plates, included Icones pictae plantarum rariorum descriptionibus et observationibus illustratae during 1790-93 and A Specimen of the Botany of New Holland, a survey of exotic species found in the new colonies of Australia. However, the first four volumes of English Botany came to be mis-attributed due to a request by Smith to remain anonymous on the title. Sowerby's name as the publisher, with a credit to himself as illustrator, allowed those enamoured by the novelety of his illustrations to perpetuate this misnomer. The title is still given in book sales as "Sowerby's Botany".
The illustrations allowed a reader not familiar with botany to identify plants; also, the aesthetic appeal of the vivid hand coloured engravings earned Sowerby much praise. However, Smith was derisive of the ability of images alone to describe a plant. The graphics needed the formal description and explanation, without which only a 'superficial knowledge' could be gained from the text. Despite disagreement between the two men, they continued to issue the work: the absence of Smith's name in the title was corrected from volume IV onwards.
Due to the very lengthy period of publication and the high total selling price, few complete first edition copies of the work were actually assembled. A full first edition with all 2,592 plates is now an extreme rarity. In 1814 Sowerby was offering the complete work or individual plates without text as follows:

"ENGLISH BOTANY; or, coloured figures of all the plants native of the Empire of Great Britain, by JAMES SOWERBY; with their essential characters, synonyms, and places of growth, to which are added occasional remarks, &c. by Sir J. E. SMITH, &c. &c. royal octvo. No. 1 to 267, £55 7s.;[*] quarto copies of the coloured plates only, may be had at 1s. each plate; also 8vo. copies of the plates only, of any particular class or genus of plants, at 6d each plate."

Sowerby's son, James de Carle Sowerby published two supplements to the original work. The first Supplement, issued from July 1829 to April 1831, comprised 100 new plates numbered 2592 - 2692 together with associated texts. The second Supplement, issued from June 1831 to January 1835, comprised 104 additional plates numbered 2693 - 2796 including two fold-out illustrations. The Supplements were available either coloured or plain.
Later editions of the book were to take advantage of mechanical colour printing, improving the affordability of the book but to the detriment of the image quality already seriously compromised by extensive wear to the original plates. The third edition in 1863 saw editor John Boswell alter the text and include a "popular portion". However, it is evident that by this third edition the original plates had already deteriorated to such a degree that many of the original fine supplemental details in the plates had to be erased to be replaced by very low-grade work by James de Carle Sowerby who also often added large, uncoloured outlines of the leaves that further reduced the quality and aesthetics of the plates. Several further editions were subsequently produced by various publishers using cheap materials and low quality methods of reproduction, each seemingly copied from the immediately prior publication thus compounding the deterioration of the images.

*Equivalent to £5,421.30 in 2016 (averaged value over the years 1791 to 1814 - Bank of England Figures)


