Marc Gopin, scholar and practitioner, is the director of the Center for World Religions, Diplomacy and Conflict Resolution (CRDC), and James H. Laue Professor at the School of Conflict Analysis and Resolution at George Mason University Arlington, Virginia, USA. The Association of Conflict Resolution recently awarded Gopin The Peacemaker Award for his contribution to the Conflict Resolution Field. Note that, in 2008 he also received the Andrew Thomas Peacebuilder Award from the New York State Dispute Resolution Association (NYSDRA). Gopin has pioneered peacebuilding projects at CRDC and trained thousands of peacebuilders in Afghanistan, Iran, Syria, Palestine and Israel on strategies to address complex conflicts. He studies dilemmas of values in global conflicts and diverse contexts where religion and culture play a crucial role in conflicts and conflict resolution.
Gopin's particular emphasis is on the role of religion and culture in not only key to conflict, but is critical to reaching lasting resolution between peoples and nations. Widely recognized for his lectures and training on peacemaking strategies, Gopin has worked in Ireland, Israel, India, Switzerland, and Italy, and has presented at Harvard, Yale, Columbia, and Princeton Universities. He has also engaged in back channel diplomacy with religious, political, and military figures on both sides of entrenched conflicts, especially in the Israel-Palestine conflict, Jordan, and Syria
He has appeared on numerous media outlets, including CNN, CNN International, Al Jazeera English, Al Jazeera Arabic, Al Arabiyah, The Jim Lehrer News Hour, National Public Radio, Voice of America, and the national public radios of Sweden and Northern Ireland. He has been published in numerous publications, including the International Herald Tribune, The Boston Globe, The Christian Science Monitor, and his work has been featured in news stories of the Times of London, the Times of India, Associated Press, and Newhouse News Service on issues of religion, violence, and conflict.
His latest research is summarized in his 2015 TED talk titled "Peace steps: one rabbi’s life journey into the heart of his enemies". He also has a series of Op-Eds/Huffington Posts http://www.huffingtonpost.com/author/marcgopin-358Dr. Gopin has several thousand readers from every section of the globe, through his Facebook community, blog community, and the readership of CRDC.
