Alberto Kenya Fujimori Fujimori (Spanish: [alˈberto fuxiˈmoɾi] or [fuʝiˈmoɾi]; Japanese: [ɸɯd͡ʑiꜜmoɾʲi]; Japanese: 藤森アルベルト, translit. Fujimori Aruberuto; born 26 July 1938 or 4 August 1938) is a former Japanese-Peruvian politician who served as the 62nd President of Peru from 28 July 1990 to 22 November 2000. A controversial figure, Fujimori ended his presidency by fleeing Peru for Japan amid a major scandal involving corruption and human rights violations. His government is credited with the creation of Fujimorism, defeating the Shining Path insurgency, and restoring Peru's macroeconomic stability. Even amid his prosecution in 2008 for crimes against humanity relating to his presidency, two-thirds of Peruvians polled voiced approval for his leadership in that period.
A Peruvian of Japanese descent, Fujimori took refuge in Japan when faced with charges of corruption in 2000. On arriving in Japan he attempted to resign his presidency via fax, but his resignation was rejected by the Congress of the Republic, which preferred to remove him from office by the process of impeachment. Wanted in Peru on charges of corruption and human rights abuses, Fujimori maintained a self-imposed exile until his arrest while visiting Chile in November 2005. He was extradited to face criminal charges in Peru in September 2007.
In December 2007, Fujimori was convicted of ordering an illegal search and seizure, and was sentenced to six years in prison. The Supreme Court upheld the decision upon his appeal. In April 2009 Fujimori was convicted of human rights violations and sentenced to 25 years in prison for his role in killings and kidnappings by the Grupo Colina death squad during his government's battle against leftist guerrillas in the 1990s.
The verdict, delivered by a three-judge panel, marked the first time that an elected head of state has been extradited to his home country, tried, and convicted of human rights violations. Fujimori was specifically found guilty of murder, bodily harm, and two cases of kidnapping. In July 2009 Fujimori was sentenced to seven and a half years in prison for embezzlement after he admitted to giving $15 million from the Peruvian treasury to his intelligence service chief, Vladimiro Montesinos. Two months later he pled guilty in a fourth trial to bribery and received an additional six-year term. Under Peruvian law all the sentences must run concurrently, with a maximum length of imprisonment of 25 years.
In 2004, Transparency International considers Fujimori as the seventh most corrupt head of state in the world for the last 20 years. Fujimori is the father of Keiko Fujimori, who is active in Peruvian politics and narrowly lost the presidential elections of 2011 and 2016.
