Citizen Profit is the term for the individual subjective value to an individual citizen of any product or service over an above what is paid for the product or service both directly in terms of e.g. purchase price and transport, but also indirectly in terms of .e.g. choice cost such as cognitive energy and time applied in the pre-acquisition process. Theoretical relation
Citizen profit has its origin in the concept of subjective value, that is the theory that value of a good is not determined by any inherent property of the good, nor by the amount of labor required to produce the good, but instead value is determined by the importance an acting individual places on a good for the achievement of their desired ends.
Neo-classical equilibrium theory has always had fundamental discussions and problems due to the assumed model of choice and assumptions of market clearing prices as human choices are at lot more complex than what could be described as rational optimization. Citizen Profit and the entire school of Subjective theory of choice represent the view that utility is inherently unquantifiable as it is both individual, non-rationalized (sup-conscious behavioral assessment) and change according to time and context See discussion.
Citizen Profit is substantially different from the neo-classical Consumer Surplus which represent the difference between what a person would be willing to pay for an item, and the actual price paid. The price a person would be willing to pay is limited by substitutional or alternate choices and thus NOT representing the full subjective value to the Citizen. It is essential to the difference that Consumer Surplus represent a mere technical benefit as consumers in classical economics are assumed to have different valuations whereas Citizen Profit in Subjective Choice Theory realize that such measure is not even quantifiable and therefore conclude that only Free Choice in competition can express the optimal value creation given option and thus clear the market optimally.
In the part of public sector services that is not exposed to open and free competition, Citizen Profit represent both the unmeasureble welfare value and the non-quantified loss due to monopolization and forced standardization. See Fool's Growth.
