Symbolic convergence theory (SCT) is a communication theory developed by Ernest Bormann where people share common fantasies and these collections of individuals are transformed into a cohesive group. SCT offers an explanation for the appearance of a group's cohesiveness, consisting of shared emotions, motives, and meanings. Through SCT, individual can build a community or a group consciousness which grow stronger if they share a cluster of fantasy themes. Symbolic convergence theory provides a description of the dynamic tendencies within systems of social interaction that cause communicative practices and forms to evolve. This theory allows theorists and practitioners to anticipate or predict what will happen and explain what did happen. One thing SCT does not do is allow for prediction and control of human communication. It attempts to explain how communication can create and sustain group consciousness through the sharing of narratives or fantasies.
To foster this cohesiveness, dramatizing or using fantasy stories are significant types of communication involved in SCT. SCT explains that meanings, emotions, values, and the motives for action are in the communication contexts by people trying to make sense out of a common experience. It explores the human tendency of trying to understand events in terms of the people involved, who have certain personality traits and motivations, and have agency over how the events unfold. SCT was first proposed by Ernest Bormann in the Quarterly Journal of Speech in 1972.
Bormann and his colleagues at the University of Minnesota introduced SCT as a framework for discovering, describing, and explaining the dynamic process by which humans come to share symbolic reality. Bormann defines the basic communicative dynamic of symbolic convergence theory as, "the sharing of group fantasies which bring about symbolic convergence for the participants" (p. 4). It is a process through which collectives create and share a consciousness and develop a common symbolic reality.
Symbolic convergence is related to attribution theory in that it deals with the human tendency to attribute meaning to signs and objects in order to make sense of them. The process of symbolic convergence resembles empathic communication.
SCT has a three-part structure:
elucidation of the recurring forms of communication involved in a shared group consciousness
illustration of why group consciousness begins, rises, and is maintained
explanation of the process of how an individual begins to share (or stops sharing) a common symbolic reality
