Rachel M. Ewald is the founder and chairwoman of Foster Care Support Foundation, Inc. The Foster Care Support Foundation FCSF is a 501(c)3 non-profit organization that provides clothing, equipment, and toys to at least 3000 foster and displaced children throughout the state of Georgia annually. The services are free for those raised on basic state per-diem and for grandparents and relatives raising their grandchildren, nieces or nephews without the biological parent/s present in the home. In 1996, Ewald began collecting and distributing clothing and toy donations from neighbors to give to local foster children in need. The program and need grew quickly and the Foundation was incorporated in 2000. Ewald, a foster parent herself of fourteen years to over 50 children and mother of four biological children, understood the difficulty of raising a child on fifty to seventy five cents per hour. The center allows for more foster parents to afford to care for state children, while also allowing the children to acquire their own clothes, toys, and be much like any other child after losing everything when pulled from their biological homes. The organization's donation/distribution center, located at 115 Mansell Place in Roswell GA is set up like a retail store and is fully stocked with clothing, toys, bikes, highchairs, and other necessities, where foster parents throughout the state can come, by appointment, and shop for free. Rachel Ewald has also written a set of transition guidelines "Healthy Children, Healthy Adults" for foster care and adoption, with the intent of reducing disruption and trauma in foster and adoptive home and when reunifying children with their biological families.
The Foundation provides an event called 'Prom-A-Palooza' in February where teen girls in foster and group homes including relative care homes from all over the State of Georgia attend to select prom a dress, jewelry, shoes, accessories and make up with consultation so that they can be a part of their own high school proms with their friends. This is a wonderful event that is always rewarding for all involved. Funded by private individual donations, corporate and foundation grants and faith based organizations, Foster Care Support receives no government or federal money for the program but is a private/public partnership with the State Division of Family and Children's Services. Funds and sponsors are always needed to operate the foundation as she continues to reach out to thousands of children across the State needing FCSF's services. New to Foster Care Support Foundation is the Hope 4 Tomorrow mentoring pilot program which teams up teens with professional and caring adults to help mentor and guide teens through their middle and high school years to prepare them as they age out of the foster care system into adult life.
