Social Optimization (Social Optimisation) is the building and maintaining of mutually beneficial and effective relationships. Mutually being the bridging concept that brings these two constructs together. In order for the states of awareness and engagement to simultaneously occur with optimal presence, trust and reciprocity is maintained between self and other. Trust and reciprocity require the presence to be aware of not only what one has to contribute (or lose) but also what the other has to gain or lose from an interaction. The extension of social optimization into a fledgling theory based on Ericsson's psychosocial stages applies the impact of social technologies on relationship development with self and others.
Social optimization is a foundational element to the The Art of Social Strategy methodology developed by Heidi Forbes Öste in 2008. Note: "social optimization" and the term "social media optimization" are not the same. Social optimization is about people and relationships. Social media optimization (SMO) is about content and media channels. SMO is a method for maximizing the efforts using social media channels. SMO includes such concepts as search engine optimization (SEO) and use of content management systems that release content according to context in the best time slots and channels to reach a target audience. Social optimization, on the other hand, refers to the human element of social interactions. Social technologies (mobile and smart phones, social media, wearables and IoT to name a few) have added a layer of complexity and opportunity to what was once limited to in person relationships. It is with this lens that the concept of social optimization is applied to understanding human, in particular social, behavior.
Components of the application of social optimization were first presented in university lectures at Malmö Högskola (University) Sweden in 2009, followed by global conferences from 2010: Global Summit of Women and BPW International, as well in keynote to OpenText Content Days. Forbes Öste is currently a doctoral candidate in Human and Organizational Systems at Fielding Graduate University extending the research on the topic of Leadership in the New Social Paradigm which is based on the Art of Social Strategy and Social Optimization. Social Optimization is a foundational element of the  series published on Amazon in 2017
Presentations and literature where Social Optimisation has been cited:
