Levirate marriage is a type of marriage in which the brother of a deceased man is obliged to marry his brother's widow. The term levirate is itself a derivative of the Latin word levir meaning "husband's brother".
Levirate marriage has been practiced by societies with a strong clan structure in which exogamous marriage (i.e. marriage outside the clan) was forbidden. It has been known in many societies around the world.
Although levirate marriage has some similarity to widow inheritance (where the deceased husband's kin can dictate whom the widow may marry, be it one of the deceased husband's kin or an unrelated person) it is nonetheless distinct.
The distinction between widow inheritance versus levirate marriage is that, in some societies, levirate marriage does not give the deceased husband's kin the right to force the widow to marry one of her deceased husband's kin (usually a brother). Rather, it gives the widow the right to force one of her deceased husband's brothers to marry her.
It follows that it is the widow that has the right to release her deceased husband's kin from their obligation to marry her if she does not wish to marry one of them. It is not the right of her deceased husband's kin to refuse a marriage to her.
In a male dominated society, where societal norms prevented females the ability to provide for themselves (such as limiting or prohibiting their employment) and they depended on males as their providers, levirate marriage could be seen as a type of life insurance for a widow to claim for her maintenance upon the death of her husband if she had no son with him to continue to provide for her.
A female's maintenance belonged to her father until she married, but it did not revert to being her father's obligation when she became a widow. After marriage her maintenance would be her husband's, and upon her husband's death it would be her firstborn son or a subsequent husband.
If there were no son and she could not find a new husband, however, levirate marriage was a right she could choose to enforce. Having previously been married, her ability to find a new husband to provide for her would have been greatly reduced due to her decreased desireability as a previously married woman. The lineage of the first son she bore with a levirate husband, however, would be deemed to be of the deceased brother of the levirate husband, and that firstborn son could only claim from the deceased husband's estate (if any existed), not from his biological father's estate (though provisions could be made for voluntarily by the biological father).
