Fenway Sports Management (FSM) is a company headquartered in Boston, Massachusetts established by Fenway Sports Group (FSG) in 2004. It styles itself as a "new kind of sports marketing agency," created by FSG to expand its footprint beyond its most famous holdings, the Boston Red Sox of Major League Baseball and Fenway Park. Fenway Sports Management specializes in sponsorship sales and brand management consulting, and serves as the global sports sponsorship sales arm of Fenway Sports Group.
During its first year, FSM entered into an exclusive sponsorship sales agreement with MLB Advanced Media and Boston College's major intercollegiate sports.
Since its inception, FSM has continued to create sponsorship programs for some of the world’s most prestigious brands and as of 2014 counts the Red Sox, Liverpool F.C., LeBron James, Johnny Manziel, Boston College, Roush Fenway Racing, MLB.com, the PGA Tour's Deutsche Bank Championship, NESN, and the Salem Red Sox among its client base. FSM’s consulting clients include Dunkin’ Donuts, Gulf Oil, JetBlue, & Santander.
In addition, FSM purchased the Salem Avalanche, a minor league baseball franchise in the High Class A Carolina League, in December 2007. On September 19, 2008, FSM announced that the Salem franchise, eventually renamed the Salem Red Sox, would replace the Lancaster JetHawks as Boston's High A affiliate in 2009.
In October 2009, Sam Kennedy was promoted to succeed Mike Dee (who became chief executive officer of the Miami Dolphins in May 2009) as executive vice president and chief operating officer of the Red Sox, and president of Fenway Sports Management.
In October 2009, FSG announced a new partnership with Fulham of the English Premiership, with shirt sponsorship to start in 2011.
In April 2011, FSM became the sole marketer of the global rights of NBA superstar LeBron James, in a management partnership deal with James and his manager Maverick Carter. As part of the deal, James and Carter both became minority stake holders in FSG's Liverpool F.C..
In January 2012, FSM negotiated a sponsorship agreement between Liverpool F.C. and Warrior Sports worth £25 million per season as of the 2012/13 season, overtaking the English club record of £23.3 million paid by Nike for supplying Manchester United Football Club and the previous deal from Adidas worth £13 million.
In January 2014, FSM became the marketer of the global rights of 2012 Heisman Trophy winner and Cleveland Browns quarterback Johnny Manziel, in a management partnership deal with LRMR Management.
In February 2015, FSM became an investor in the Pawtucket Red Sox of the Triple-A International League, when a new ownership group led by Red Sox president/CEO Larry Lucchino (and including two limited partners in Fenway Sports Group) acquired the PawSox from the heirs of late owner Ben Mondor.
On August 1, 2015, Lucchino announced his pending retirement as president/CEO of the Boston Red Sox, with Sam Kennedy promoted to president of the baseball club. Kennedy was signed to a new five-year contract as president and CEO of both the Red Sox and Fenway Sports Management on August 2, 2017.
