An equatorial bulge is a difference between the equatorial and polar diameters of a planet, due to the force exerted by its rotation. A rotating body tends to form an oblate spheroid rather than a sphere. The Earth has an equatorial bulge of 42.77 km (26.58 mi); that is, its diameter measured across the equatorial plane (12,756.27 km (7,926.38 mi)) is 42.77 km more than that measured between the poles (12,713.56 km (7,899.84 mi)). An observer standing at sea level on either pole, therefore, is 21.36 km closer to Earth's centrepoint than if standing at sea level on the equator. The value of Earth's radius may be approximated by the average of these radii.
An often-cited result of Earth's equatorial bulge is that the highest point on Earth, measured from the center outwards, is the peak of Mount Chimborazo in Ecuador, rather than Mount Everest. But since the ocean also bulges, like Earth and its atmosphere, Chimborazo is not as high above sea level as Everest is.
The standard formula for this force is the relationship 
  
    
      
        
          F
          
            c
          
        
        =
        M
        
          v
          
            2
          
        
        
          /
        
        R
      
    
    {\displaystyle F_{c}=Mv^{2}/R}
  . However, velocity at the surface is equal to the product of radius and rotational velocity, and therefore the force is directly proportional to radius. Viewing the globe as a series of rotating discs, the radius R toward the poles gets very small and thus a smaller force is produced for the same rotational velocity (approaching zero at the pole). Moving towards the equator, v^2 increases much faster than R, thus producing the greatest force at the equator. In addition, because the Earth’s dense core is included in the cross sectional disc at the equator, it contributes more to the mass of the disc. Similarly, there is a bulge in the water envelope of the oceans surrounding Earth; this bulge is created by the greater centrifugal force at the equator and is independent of tides. Sea level at the equator is 21.36 km higher than sea level at the poles, in terms of distance from the center of the planet.
