EEPC India is the premier trade and investment promotion organization . It is sponsored by the Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Government of India and caters to the Indian engineering sector. As an advisory body it actively contributes to the policies of Government of India and acts as an interface between the engineering industry and the Government.
Set up in 1955, EEPC India now has a membership base of over 12,000 out of whom 60% are SMEs.
EEPC India organizes a large number of promotional activities such as buyer-seller meets (BSM) – both in India and abroad, overseas trade fairs/exhibitions, and India pavilion/information booths in selected overseas exhibitions to demonstrate the capabilities of Indian engineering industry and to provide the overseas buyers with true value as propagated by Brand India.
India Engineering Exhibition (INDEE) is EEPC India’s own brand and is one of the largest expositions of engineering in the world. This has been happening for the last few decades and is established as the largest and most important showcase for Indian engineering.
EEPC India facilitates sourcing from India and boosts the SMEs to raise their standard at par with the international best practices. It also encourages the SMEs to integrate their business to the global value chain.
To encourage building global partnerships with India, EEPC India organizes India Engineering Sourcing Show (IESS), the largest display of engineering products and services every year. This is recognized as the only sourcing event in India – showcasing the latest technologies and a preferred meeting place for global buyers & sellers. This show is also important to encourage foreign investments in line with the newly initiated “Make in India” campaign, by Government of India.
Extending its regular agenda, EEPC India publishes several reports/studies to make the members aware about the international trends and opportunities in order to enhance their global footprints.
Keeping ‘Engineering the Future’ as the motto, EEPC India serves as the reference point for the Indian engineering industry and the international business community in its efforts towards establishing India as a major engineering hub in the future.
EEPC India aims to raise $900 billion with the implementation of New Foreign Trade Policy (2015-2020)
The council started a monthly magazine named "ie2" on 10 November 2006 by Shri Nirupam Sen, Minister of Industries, Government of West Bengal. It covers insights on current trends of the global economy, international trade and all things related to the Indian Economy. It also have section on Success Stories where members views about the best practices and success formulae for becoming one of the India's leading exporters.
