The Cagayan Economic Zone Authority (CEZA) is the government-owned and controlled corporation (GOCC) tasked to manage and supervise the development of the Cagayan Special Economic Zone and Freeport (CSEZFP). CEZA’s creation and operation is mandated by virtue of Republic Act 7922, otherwise known as the “Cagayan Special Economic Zone Act of 1995” by then President Fidel V. Ramos. The Cagayan Economic Zone Act of 1995 was authored by Sen. Juan Ponce Enrile, a native of Gonzaga town in Cagayan.
Spatially, the Cagayan Economic Zone & Freeport covers the entire Municipality of Sta., Ana including the Islands of Fuga, Barit, Mabbag in the Municipality of Aparri in the Province of Cagayan . Approximately 54,118 hectares of land for prime development falls within the jurisdiction of CEZA. It is surrounded by the waters of Babuyan Channel and West Philippine Sea on the North and the Pacific Ocean on the east.
The Cagayan Special Economic Zone and Freeport, also known as Cagayan Freeport, is a special economic zone in Cagayan Province, northern Luzon, in the Philippines. It is envisioned to be a self-sustaining industrial, commercial, financial, tourism and recreational center, in order to effectively encourage and attract legitimate and productive local and foreign investments and eventually create employment opportunities and increase income and productivity in the rural areas around the Freeport Zone.
The Cagayan Freeport Zone has been identified as a potential development impetus for the region. It is a major transshipment point for trade in the Asia-Pacific rim due to its strategic location between the Pacific Ocean and the West Philippine Sea, on major international shipping routes between the West Coast of North America, the Far East and Southeast Asia. It is strategically located in relation to the strong overseas markets of Taiwan, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China, Japan, and South Korea. The geography is suitable for the development of a transshipment hub with a modern seaport and airport with ample surrounding land area for the establishment of industrial, commercial and tourism developments.
The freeport is at the forefront of the development of the gaming infrastructure. Gaming operators and entities operating in the freeport enjoy numerous benefits and incentives inherent including the potential of positioning themselves as lead players in the freeport, ensuing global connectivity. CEZA is a leading online (offshore) gaming jurisdiction in Asia.
The freeport also enjoys autonomy to operate as a separate customs territory similar to Hong Kong, Singapore, Labuan in Malaysia and Hamburg in Germany. It made the location an ideal site for an international transshipment hub.
The Zone sits right in the crossroads of international shipping routes, and is doubly blessed by its close proximity to the biggest economies in the Asia-Pacific region, accessible by air and by sea, which allows for the efficient, cost-effective transshipment of goods to Hong Kong, Guangzhou, Shanghai, Xiamen, Kaohsiung, Taipei, Japan, and other key Asian markets.
By plane, the Cagayan Freeport Zone is 45 minutes from Kaohsiung, one hour from Hong Kong, Guangzhou and Taipei, 2:30 hours from Shanghai, and 3:00 hours plus from Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, Singapore and Tokyo. We are the nearest to Vladivostok in Russia and Los Angeles in the United States. With a brand-new international airport soon to operate, and with Port Irene soon to be expanded, even as it undergoes major rehab, the Cagayan Freeport stands prominently as a regional logistics and transshipment hub.
Some of the best business opportunities in CEZA are ripe in the following ventures: IT Development, BPOs, Offshore Banking Units, Financial Institutions, Sports, Amusement and Recreation, Medical Tourism, Integrated Resorts, Casino Gaming Operations, Ship Building and Repair, Power and Water Plant Development, Logistics and Cargo Handling, Hotel and Restaurants, Duty-Free Shops and Outlets, Factories and Manufacturing, and Agricultural Production, among others.
CEZA has built a telecommunications network that has fiber-optic lines and redundant internet connectivity. With it, business locators could host their network and data storage equipment in a highly secured environment equipped with redundant power and cooling system. CEZA is also committed to build a new city and township equipped with world-class amenities; it is now working closely with private owners of exclusive resorts inside its jurisdiction to fulfill this dream.
These are the 500-hectare Barit Island, the 900-hectare Mabag Island, the 200-hectare Pozo Robo beach and mountain resort complex, facing the world famous Palaui Island and the 10,000-hectare Fuga Island, with its pristine white sand beaches and spectacular landscape, as a vacation getaway there could not be a more enchanting place in this side of Luzon island. The sheer beauty of Fuga Island could compete with the world-famous Maldives, Bora Bora, Waikiki and Bali. It is planned to be connected by a suspension bridge to Barit and Mabag islands, which are excellent dive sites.
And of course Palaui Island, described by CNN Travel as one of the best beaches in the world. Palaui hosted two seasons of the world- famous television series, “Survivor.”
The Cagayan Zone and Freeport can be said to be the center of the Trans-Pacific sea lanes. This strategic location is a vital element in the development concept called the “Global TransPark”. With the GTP, the Freeport will be in a strong position to cash in on the growing trade with the APEC region as well as the increasing intra-Asian trade. It will allow the economic zone to be accessible from international centers, and it will make it a smart alternative location for firms that operate on 21st-century business practices.
The proposed Global TransPark system will boast of the following basic elements: a well-equipped international cargo airport and seaport; manufacturing, distribution and cold-storage facilities; direct multi-modal transport linkages; cargo transfer system; and central cargo area. The Global TransPark system would build a seamless environment integrating the vital elements of transport, telecommunications, manufacturing, distribution, technology, industry and education.
CEZA is headed by Secretary Raul L. Lambino as its current Administrator and Chief Executive Officer.
