The Halal Industry Development Corporation Sdn Bhd (Malay: Perbadanan Pembangunan Industri Halal), abbreviated HDC, an agency under the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, is an initiative of the Malaysian government to ensure the integrated and comprehensive development of the national halal industry. HDC focuses on the development of halal standards; branding and promotion; and commercial development of halal products and services.
Dato' Seri Jamil Bidin serves as HDC Chief Executive Officer. It was officially incorporated on 18 September 2006 as a dedicated organisation focused on the key mission to realise Malaysia’s vision to become the Global Halal hub  and elevate halal as the standard of choice. HDC is the world's first Government-backed halal industry development corporation to coordinate a comprehensive development of the halal industry.
In August 2006, Syed Jalaludin Syed Salim, PhD was appointed chairman of HDC and Dato' Seri Jamil Bidin the corporation's Chief Executive Officer. In September 2006, HDC was launched. HDC took over halal administration from the Department of Islamic Development of Malaysia (JAKIM) "in order to place halal matters fully under one central agency."
In April 2011, HDC began a partnership with the JAKIM, in which HDC trains and consults with small-and-medium-sized enterprises so that the enterprises can apply for halal certificates from JAKIM.
In October 2013, HDC signed a memorandum of understanding with SME Bank and Bumiputera Agenda Steering Unit for the establishment of a RM280 million Halal Development Fund. The fund is intended to the develop the halal industry and Bumiputera entrepreneurs in Malaysia for international markets. HDC is to provide a list of pre-screened halal-compliant companies for the fund.
The Dubai Airport Freezone Authority ( DAFZA ) has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Malaysia's Halal Industry Development Corp. (HDC). The strategic partnership was inked at DAFZA 's headquarters, with Dr. Mohammed Al Zarooni, Director General of DAFZA , and Dato' Seri Jamil Bidin, Chief Executive Officer of HDC, as signatories. Under the terms of the MoU, DAZFA will collaborate with HDC on developing halal compliance infrastructure in Dubai to achieve mutually beneficial business objectives, direct and assist in halal development process among all stake holders, support investments between the UAE and Malaysia, and facilitate the participation and growth of companies involved in the halal trade through a hub-to-hub network.
