African Union (AU) is a continental union consisting of all fifty-five countries on the African continent
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) is a forum for 21 Pacific Rim member economies that promotes free trade throughout the Asia-Pacific region
Arab League, a regional organization of Arab countries in and around North Africa, the Horn of Africa and Arabia, Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen, to draw closer the relations between member States and co-ordinate collaboration between them, to safeguard their independence and sovereignty, and to consider in a general way the affairs and interests of the Arab countries
ASEAN, The Association of Southeast Asian Nations, a regional organisation comprising ten Southeast Asian states
BASIC countries, four large newly industrialized countries, Brazil, South Africa, India, China, to act jointly on climate change and emissions reduction
Benelux Union is a politico-economic union of three neighbouring states in western Europe: Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg.
BIMSTEC, A group of countries in South Asia and South East Asia around the Bay of Bengal to promote technological and economic co-operation, which includes Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Thailand.
BRIC, Brazil, Russia, India, and China, which are all deemed to be at a similar stage of newly advanced economic development
BRICS, Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa, leading developing or newly industrialized countries, and are distinguished by their large, sometimes fast-growing economies and significant influence on regional affairs
CARICOM, Caribbean Community, an organization of fifteen Caribbean nations and dependencies
CARIFTA, Caribbean Free Trade Association
CIVETS, six emerging markets countries, Colombia, Indonesia, Vietnam, Egypt, Turkey, and South Africa, a diverse and dynamic economy and a young, growing population
Comecon, formally the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance, consisted of socialist economies within the Communist world: the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, and Vietnam. The organization existed from 1949 to 1991 during the Cold War.
Commonwealth of Nations, fifty-two member states that are mostly former territories of the British Empire.
Community of Portuguese Language Countries
Development Assistance Committee (DAC), to discuss issues surrounding aid, development and poverty reduction in developing countries, the world's major donor countries, Australia, European Union, Iceland, New Zealand, South Korea, Austria, Finland, Ireland, Norway, Spain, Belgium, France, Italy, Poland, Sweden, Canada, Germany, Japan, Portugal, Switzerland, Czech Republic, Greece, Luxembourg, Slovakia, United Kingdom, Denmark, Hungary, Netherlands, Slovenia, and United States.
East African Community (EAC) is an intergovernmental organisation composed of six countries in the African Great Lakes region in eastern Africa: Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda.
Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO), Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz, Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, a political and economic organization, a platform to discuss ways to improve development and promote trade and investment opportunities, the objective is to establish a single market for goods and services.
EAEU, Eurasian Economic Union, an economic union of Belarus, Kazakhstan, Russia, Armenia, Kyrgyzstan.
EU, The European Union, a political and economic union of twenty-eight member states that are located primarily in Europe.
Four Asian Tigers, economies of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, underwent rapid industrialization and maintained exceptionally high growth rates, now developed into advanced and high-income economies.
G4 nations, Brazil, Germany, India, and Japan, four countries which support each other’s bids for permanent seats on the United Nations Security Council.
Group of Eight (G8), Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Russia, the world's major highly industrialized economies in countries that view themselves as democracies.
G8+5, the G8 nations, plus the five leading emerging economies (Brazil, China, India, Mexico, and South Africa).
G20, or Group of Twenty, twenty major economies, Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, European Union, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States, for studying, reviewing, and promoting high-level discussion of policy issues pertaining to the promotion of international financial stability.
Group of 7 (G7), Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States, the seven major advanced economies as reported by the International Monetary Fund.
Group of 77 (G77), a loose coalition of developing nations, designed to promote its members' collective economic interests and create an enhanced joint negotiating capacity in the United Nations.
Gulf Cooperation Council, Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE. A regional intergovernmental political and economic union consisting of all Arab states of the Persian Gulf, except for Iraq.
IBSA Dialogue Forum, India, Brazil, South Africa, an international tripartite grouping for promoting international cooperation among these countries.
Mercosur (Southern Common Market), Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, Venezuela, Bolivia, Chile, Peru, Colombia, Ecuador, Suriname, to promote free trade and the fluid movement of goods, people, and currency.
MIKTA, an informal partnership between Mexico, Indonesia, Republic of Korea, Turkey, Australia, to support effective global governance.
MINT, the economies of Mexico, Indonesia, Nigeria, and Turkey.
NACAr, Norway, Australia, Canada, Argentina, countries characterized by middle to high income per capita, a low population density and a concentration of exports in natural resources.
North American Free Trade Agreement, NAFTA is an agreement signed by Canada, Mexico, and the United States, creating a trilateral trade bloc in North America.
Next Eleven (Nll), Bangladesh, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Philippines, Turkey, South Korea, and Vietnam – identified as having a high potential of becoming, along with the BRICS countries, among the world's largest economies in the 21st century.
OAS, Organization of American States, is a continental organization of the 35 different independent nations within North and South America
OECD, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, to stimulate economic progress and world trade, countries committed to democracy and the market economy, most OECD members are high-income economies with a very high Human Development Index (HDI) and are regarded as developed countries.
OIAS, Organization of Ibero-American States, an organization of Portuguese and Spanish Speaking Nations of the Americas, Africa, and Europe.
OPEC, Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, thirteen countries accounting for an estimated 42 percent of global oil production and 73 percent of the world's proven oil reserves.
P5, permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Pacific Alliance, a trade bloc of states that border the Pacific Ocean. Permanent members include Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru.
Paris Club, a group of major creditor countries whose officials meet ten times a year in the city of Paris, with the intent to find coordinated and sustainable solutions to the payment difficulties experienced by debtor countries.
PIGS, the economies of the countries of Portugal, Greece, Spain, Italy and/or Ireland.
Rio Group, was an international organization of Latin American and some Caribbean states that was succeeded in 2010 by the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States.
United Nations (UN), an intergovernmental organization to promote international co-operation, 193 member states.
Visegrád Group, an alliance of four Central European States Czechia, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia.
VISTA (Vietnam, Indonesia, South Africa, Turkey, and Argentina) is an emerging markets grouping proposed in 2006 by BRICs Economic Research Institute of Japan.
