Huaricanga is the earliest city of the Norte Chico civilization. It existed around 3500 BCE and was the oldest city in the Americas and one of the earliest cities in the world." This Late Archaic site is located in the Fortaleza Valley on Peru’s north central coast. It is 14 miles inland from the Pacific Ocean. The site covers a total area of 100 hectares, and is the largest Late Archaic construction in the Norte Chico region. Currently, the Pativilca-Huaraz highway divides the site. The current site consists of two mounds, the larger of which measures roughly two football fields in length. Near this larger mound were two standing stones, known as huancas, which are believed to hold some sacred ceremonial purpose. Huaricanga also served as a religious center, and residents would persuade fishermen and inhabitants of the nearby highlands to participate in seasonal rituals.
Additionally, there is a third, U shaped mound located above the river floodplain at Huaricanga. It is known as El Castillo de Huaricanga, and judging from the ceramics found at the site, it was from the Initial Period (1800-900 BC). During this time and during the Early Horizon Period (900-200 BC), El Castillo de Huaricanga served as a stop for travelers on their way to the major religious site of Chavin de Huantar.
The site of Huaricanga has been excavated in 2003 and 2007 by PANC (Proyecto Arqueológico Norte Chico). The 2007 excavation uncovered evidence of a structure that consisted of a two level floor, a surrounding bench, a central fire pit, and niched walls. This indicates that the temple was constructed in the Mito architectural tradition, which is also seen in the Peruvian highlands. However, using radiocarbon dating, the structure has been confirmed to be constructed around 2560 BC. This means that this temple predates even the earliest known examples of the Mito tradition. A range of samples was tested, including mixed plant fibers, bag fibers, and charcoal.
The land in and around Huaricanga consists mainly of rock and dirt, with very few trees. The climate is generally dry. The ancient people of Huaricanga were completely dependent on irrigation for the growth of their crops. Some experts theorize that an increased frequency of the weather phenomenon El Niño worsened fishing conditions, driving people inland towards sites such as Huaricanga.
