Lorenzo Chiesa (born 25 April 1976) is a philosopher, critical theorist, and translator whose research focuses on the intersection between ontology, psychoanalysis, and political theory.
He is best known for his monographs on Jacques Lacan, published by MIT Press, and translations of the work of Giorgio Agamben, published by Stanford University Press.   He has also written widely on contemporary French and Italian philosophy, biopolitics, and Marxism.  
Since 2014 Chiesa has been Visiting Professor in the socio-political philosophy MA programme  of the European University at Saint Petersburg and at the Freud’s Dream Museum of the East European Institute of Psychoanalysis. He serves as Director of the Genoa School of Humanities. Previously, he taught at the University of Kent (2006-2014), where he was Professor of Modern European Thought and founded and directed the Centre for Critical Thought. He also held visiting positions at the University of New Mexico, the Institute of Philosophy of Ljubljana, Italian Institute of Human Sciences (SUM) Naples, and Jnanapravaha Mumbai.
Chiesa’s Subjectivity and Otherness (2007), which focuses on Lacan’s theory of the subject, has been described as setting “a new benchmark of conceptual rigour within the realm of introductory texts on Lacanian thought”. His treatment of the implications of psychoanalysis for materialism and atheism in The Not-Two (2016) is extensively discussed by Slavoj Žižek in Disparities.  According to Roberto Esposito, Chiesa is “one of the rare philosophers capable of making Lacan’s psychoanalytic apparatus interact with the various languages of continental thought”. He has also been referred to as “the leader of a new generation of ‘young Lacanians’, for whom Lacan is primarily a text that needs to be read”. Chiesa argues that “psychoanalysis is not intrinsically political” while it is needed to “criticise classical ontology, think new ways in which to approach the question of ontology, and then, from that standpoint, think progressive politics”.
