See Severe weather terminology (United States) for a comprehensive article on related weather terms.

A tornado watch (SAME code: TOA) is issued when weather conditions are favorable for the development of severe thunderstorms called a supercell that are capable of producing tornadoes. A tornado watch therefore implies that it is also a severe thunderstorm watch. A tornado watch must not be confused with a tornado warning. In most cases, the potential exists for large hail and/or damaging winds in addition to tornadoes.
A watch does not mean that the severe weather is actually occurring, only that atmospheric conditions have created a significant risk for it. If severe weather actually does occur, a tornado warning or severe thunderstorm warning would then be issued. Note that a watch is not required for a warning to be issued; tornado warnings are occasionally issued when a tornado watch is not active (i.e. when a severe thunderstorm watch is active, or when no watches are in effect), if a severe thunderstorm develops and has a confirmed tornado or strong rotation.
In the United States, the Storm Prediction Center (a national guidance center of the National Weather Service) issues watches for areas likely to produce tornadoes and severe thunderstorms. The watch boxes (or weather watches, WWs) are usually outlined in the format of x miles north and south, or east and west, or either side of a line from y miles direction of city, state, to z miles another direction of another city, state. For example: "50 miles either side of a line from 10 miles northeast of Columbia, South Carolina to 15 miles south-southwest of Montgomery, Alabama" ("Either side" means perpendicular to the center line). In addition, a list of all counties included in its area of responsibility is now issued by each NWS forecast office for each watch.
In the event that a tornado watch is likely to lead to a major tornado outbreak along with possible destructive winds and hail, enhanced wording with the words Particularly Dangerous Situation (PDS) can be added to the watch; this is occasionally issued when atmospheric conditions are deemed sufficient to breed development of severe thunderstorms that are capable of producing significant tornadoes (either from supercells that develop strong, low-level rotation under typical tornadogenesis during the storm's maturation stage, or by thunderstorms that initiate mesocyclone maturation during their early development through a combination of sufficient wind shear and very high convective available potential energy (CAPE) values). Occasionally, a tornado watch may replace a severe thunderstorm watch (or a portion of one) should conditions that were originally forecast to be conducive for non-tornadic severe thunderstorms change to allow possible tornado formation.
In Canada, the criteria used to issue a tornado watch are the same and watches are issued by regional offices of the Meteorological Service of Canada of Environment Canada in Vancouver, Edmonton, Toronto, Montreal and Halifax, on a county or regional basis.
The term "red box" refers to the assigned coloring used for watch box outlines used in Storm Prediction Center and National Weather Service products; television stations typically assign other colors (colors used may vary, but very seldom if ever red, which is usually used for tornado warnings; green is the most commonly used to denote them) to highlight tornado watches in severe weather advisory displays.
