Jonathan Evan Fielding M.D., M.P.H., M.A., M.B.A. (born 1942) is the former Director/Health Officer of the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health. Currently he is a Distinguished Professor at UCLA in the Fielding School of Public Health and the Geffen School of Medicine. He is the founder and Co-Director of the School of Public Health’s Center for Health Advancement. The Center has expertise in forecasting and modeling future health and analyzing the health and financial impact of evidence based policies and programs in non-health sectors such as education, transportation, and natural resources.
As Director of one of the largest health departments in the United States, Fielding oversaw public health activities, including those for environmental health, disease control, health education, health assessment, and chronic diseases. During his more than 16 years tenure, Fielding led efforts to develop plans to deal with emergencies related to bioterrorism, pandemic flu, and other emerging diseases and conditions. He also called attention to the underlying determinants of health, including, the physical and social environments in which we live. He was responsible for implementing the Los Angeles County restaurant “A B C” grading system which has been widely emulated throughout the U.S.. Fielding also served as Commissioner and vice-chair of the First 5 Los Angeles Los Angeles Commission, whose mission is to improve health and development of children 5 years of age and under.
granting over $100 million annually to improve health and development of children 5 years of age and under. Fielding has been a founding member of a number of national task forces that assess best evidence and make recommendations to improve the health of the public. These include the U.S. Clinical Preventive Services Task Force and the U.S. Community Preventive Services Task Force, which he has chaired for over a decade. Fielding has published on a wide range of public health as well as preventive medicine issues. He has authored over 250 peer-reviewed articles, chapters and editorials. He has served as Associate Editor and then Editor of the Annual Review of Public Health over a 35 year period. Fielding is a former board member and former chair of the national Truth Initiative (formerly the American Legacy Foundation), with oversees $1 billion from the (year) tobacco settlement to end youth use of combustible cigarettes and other nicotine delivery devices, and also former Chair of the Partnership for Prevention. He is an elected member of the National Academy of Sciences Academy of Medicine and the former President of the American College of Preventive Medicine.
In 2006, Dr. Fielding received the American Public Health Association (APHA)’s oldest and most prestigious award, the Sedgwick Memorial Medal for Distinguished Public Health. In 2008, he was appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services Michael Leavitt to chair the Secretary’s Advisory Committee on the 2020 Health Objectives for the Nation, and in 2016 appointed a Co-Chair emeritus for the Advisory Committee for the 2030 national Health Objectives. He was also appointed to the California Department of Public Health Advisory Committee. In April 2009 Fielding received the UCLA Medal, the university's highest honor, for his work as an innovator, leader and public health visionary. In January 2011 he was appointed by President Barack Obama to the Advisory Group on Prevention, Health Promotion, and Integrative and Public Health, becoming one of the 13 founding members of the group.[4] In 2012 he received the Fries Prize for pioneering work in identifying and applying effective worksite and public prevention programs and policies that have improved health for million of Americans. The prize was given by the James F. and Sarah T. Fries Foundation. He was also named an Honorary Fellow of the Society for Public Health Education for his visionary leadership and lifetime of contributions to public health. He is a founding member of Shatterproof, the national organization working to end addiction, and an advisor to Working Nation and Sound Body Sound Mind, improving youth fitness through enhanced school programs. In 2016 he started writing a monthly column for US News and World Report on current topics in public health.
In 2014 Dr. Fielding and his wife Karin gave a gift to UCLA to endow the Jonathan and Karin Fielding School of Public Health. They also have provided a lead gift to support the construction of the Fielding Wing of American Folk Art at the Huntington Library, Botanical Gardens and Art Collection in San Marino California, and are donating a substantial portion of their American folk art collection to that institution.
