In the context of Health informatics, CCOW or Clinical Context Object Workgroup is a Health Level Seven International standard protocol designed to enable disparate applications to synchronize in real time, and at the user-interface level. It is vendor independent and allows applications to present information at the desktop and/or portal level in a unified way.
CCOW is the primary standard protocol in healthcare to facilitate a process called "Context Management." Context Management is the process of using particular "subjects" of interest (e.g., user, patient, clinical encounter, charge item, etc.) to 'virtually' link disparate applications so that the end-user sees them operate in a unified, cohesive way.
Context Management can be utilized for both CCOW and non-CCOW compliant applications. The CCOW standard exists to facilitate a more robust, and near "plug-and-play" interoperability across disparate applications.
Context Management is often combined with Single Sign On applications in the healthcare environment, but the two are discrete functions. Single Sign On is the process that enables the secure access of disparate applications by a user through use of a single authenticated identifier and password. Context Management augments this by then enabling the user to identify subjects once (e.g., a patient) and have all disparate systems into which the user is granted access to "tune" to this patient simultaneously. As the user further identifies particular "subjects" of interest (e.g., a particular visit), those applications containing information about the selected subject will then automatically and seamlessly to the user "tune" to that information as well. The end result for the user is an aggregated view of all patient information across disparate applications.
Use of Context Management, facilitated by CCOW or non-CCOW compliant applications, is valuable for both client-server, and web-based applications. Furthermore, a fully robust Context Manager will enable use for both client-server and web-based applications on a single desktop / kiosk, allowing the user to utilize both types of applications in a "context aware" session.
CCOW works for both client-server and web-based applications. The acronym CCOW stands for "Clinical Context Object Workgroup", a reference to the standards committee within the HL7 group that developed the standard.
