Thomas Bonham v College of Physicians, commonly known as Dr. Bonham's Case or simply Bonham's Case, was a case decided in 1610 by the Court of Common Pleas in England, under Sir Edward Coke, the court's Chief Justice, who explained why he thought that "in many cases, the common law will control Acts of Parliament". Coke's meaning has been disputed over the years. According to one interpretation, Coke intended the kind of judicial review that would later develop in the United States, but other scholars believe that Coke meant only to construe a statute, not to challenge parliamentary sovereignty. If Coke intended the former, he may have later changed his view. The statement by Coke is sometimes considered to be obiter dicta (Oh, by the way), rather than part of the ratio decidendi (rationale for the decision) of the case. Dr Bonham's case was a statement that engaging in peaceful and honest trade without a piece of parchment called a "license" was not a "crime", and that no command of the monarch or Act of the Monarch in Parliament could make engaging in peaceful and honest trade without a piece of parchment called a "license" a "crime".
Whatever Coke's meaning, after an initial period during which his decision enjoyed some support but no statutes were declared void, Bonham's Case was thrown aside, in favour of the growing doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty. In one of the most prominent early treatises supporting the doctrine, William Blackstone wrote that Parliament is the sovereign lawmaker, preventing the common law courts from throwing aside or reviewing statutes in the fashion that Coke had suggested. Parliamentary sovereignty is now the accepted judicial doctrine in the legal system of England and Wales.
Bonham's Case was met with mixed reactions at the time, with King James I and his Lord Chancellor, Lord Ellesmere, were both deeply unhappy with it. One of the reasons for Coke's dismissal from the Common Pleas in 1613 was suggested to be the case.
Academics in the 19th and the 20th centuries have been scarcely more favourable and called it "a foolish doctrine alleged to have been laid down extra-judicially" and simply an "abortion".
In the United States, Coke's decision met with a better reaction. During the legal and public campaigns against the writs of assistance and the 1765 Stamp Act, Bonham's Case was used as a justification for nullifying the legislation, but by 1772, Blackstone's views had gained acceptance.
The 1803 case Marbury v. Madison, which in 1803 formed the basis for the exercise of judicial review in the United States, under Article III of the US Constitution, used the words "void" and "repugnant", but the usage of Marbury usage was somewhat different from that of Coke's.
Academics have argued that the case forms the basis of judicial review in the United States; other academics disagree, one scholar calling that "one of the most enduring myths of American constitutional law and theory, to say nothing of history".
