intendiX is a commercial brain-computer interface (BCI) environment. intendiX was introduced in 2009 by Guger Technologies OG, or g.tec, an Austrian company that manufactures BCI systems and components. intendiX is designed as a personal BCI that anyone can use without technical training or outside support. It is robust to many types of environmental noise and can operate in home or hospital environments. Most people can use intendiX to spell five to ten characters per minute within about ten minutes of training. While intendiX has been used as an assistive technology by persons with severe disabilities, performance may be worse among users with disabilities due to fatigue, visual deficits, or impaired concentration, attention, or memory.
intendiX can rely on one of : P300 and SSVEP. Both of these are very well established paradigms in BCI research, Research articles have shown that nearly all people with a healthy visual system can use these types of BCIs. Both of these approaches require the user to pay attention to a specific region of the monitor. In a P300 BCI, different items on the monitor (such as letters) flash while the user is instructed to silently count each time a target item flashes. The BCI can identify the target item by determining which flashes elicited brain signals reflecting attention to that item. One of the most distinct such signals is the P300, hence the name. BCIs that rely on steady state visual evoked potentials (SSVEPs) instead rely on items that flicker instead of flash. The user focuses on one of the flickering items, producing SSVEP activity at the same frequency as that item. SSVEP signals are often found at harmonics of the stimulation frequency as well, which most SSVEP BCIs (including intendiX) exploit to improve performance. Therefore, a BCI can determine the target item by identifying the peak frequencies in the user's visual areas, which can only correspond to one of the many items on the monitor.
intendiX is an evolving product, with new components, options and upgrades each year. Like any BCI, the intendiX system requires four components: sensors that detect brain activity; signal processing algorithms that identify relevant brain signals in realtime; a device or application where the output signal is sent; and an operating environment that connects these components to each other and mediate interaction with the user. While these four components are presented somewhat differently, they are well recognized across review and commentary articles in the BCI community (Wolpaw et al., 2002; Allison et al., 2007, 2012; Wolpaw and Wolpaw, 2012).
