CSPro, short for the Census and Survey Processing System, is a public domain data processing software package developed by the U.S. Census Bureau and ICF International. Serpro S.A. was involved in past development. Funding for development comes primarily from the U.S. Agency for International Development. The main purpose of this Software framework is to design application for Data Collection and processing.
CSPro was designed and implemented through a joint effort by the developers of two software packages that were previously used to process census and survey data on DOS machines: the Integrated Microcomputer Processing System (IMPS) and the Integrated System for Survey Analysis (ISSA).So, actual CSPro come from more than 30 years of development. The public domain distribution is binary-only.
The software can be used on Windows (7,8,10) OS Computers to design application able to be deployed on Android and Windows family OS following his "Build Once, Deploy Many" ability. These applications can be used for mobile Survey data collection using Smartphone, Tablets such as office data keying using other Computer devices (Laptop, Desktop).
A Cspro designed Application can be a dynamic and intelligent questionnaire for entering, editing, tabulating, mapping, and disseminating census and survey data. Also, the simple IDE of Cspro Designer can implement sophisticated Information System using in various fields: Monitoring and Evaluation, Business Administration, Logistics etc.
This package is widely used Worldwide by Statistical Agencies, International Organizations, NGO, Consulting Firms, Colleges and Universities, hospitals, and private sector groups in more than 160 countries. Major international household survey programs, such as Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS) and Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) also use CSPro for Census and Survey works. Unicode data entry is supported, and Mobile data collection can be conducted on Android, Windows so do Windows 7, 8, 10 devices.Linux and IOS OS families are not supported.
While the program uses a simple graphical interface (IDE), CSPro also contains a sophisticated programming language that can be used to create highly customized applications. Beginning users can program simple quality control checks, and advanced users can write dynamic applications using the procedural language.
By November, 2017, it's still actively in development. With latest improvements, CSPro designed application support :
SQLite and SQL language;
CSS, HTML, JavaScript via templated report;
PHP through Csweb;
Powerful and Comprehensive Paradata for complete and intelligent monitoring of the data collection step;
Multiples programming languages improvements (smart synchronization, dynamic translation, etc);
The source code of the CSweb API and the help has been released to the public. But other Cspro parts source code are not yet.
