The State University of New York at Buffalo is a public research university with campuses in Buffalo and Amherst, New York, United States. It is commonly referred to as the University at Buffalo (UB) or SUNY Buffalo, and was formerly known as the University of Buffalo. The university was founded in 1846 as a private medical college, but in 1962 merged with the State University of New York (SUNY) system. By enrollment, UB is the largest in the SUNY system, and also the largest public university in New York. UB also has the largest endowment and research funding, as a comprehensive university center in the SUNY system.
As of 2017, the university enrolls 30,648 students in 13 colleges. In addition to the College of Arts and Sciences, the university houses the largest state-operated medical school, dental school, education school, business school, engineering school, and also features the only state law school, architecture and urban planning school, and pharmacy school in the state of New York. The university offers over 100 bachelor's, 205 master's, 84 doctoral, and 10 professional areas of study.
According to the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education, the University at Buffalo is a Doctoral University with the Highest research activity (R1). In 1989, UB was elected to the Association of American Universities, which represents 62 prestigious, leading research universities in the United States and Canada. UB's alumni and faculty have included a Prime Minister, astronauts, Nobel laureates, Pulitzer Prize winners, three billionaires, Academy Award winners, Emmy Award winners, Fulbright Scholars, and Rhodes Scholars. U.S. President Millard Fillmore was one of the school's principal founders and served as the school's first chancellor.
In the Wall Street Journal/Times Higher Education 2017 inaugural ranking, UB was ranked as the #1 public university in New York and #28 in the nation. Buffalo has consistently placed in the top cluster of U.S. public research universities and among the overall top 30 research universities according to the Center for Measuring University Performance and was ranked as the 38th best value for in-state students and the 27th best value for out-of-state students in the 2012 Kiplinger rankings of best value of national universities. U.S. News and World Report's 2017 edition of America's Best Colleges ranked UB 97th on their list of best national universities and 41st among public universities.


