Robert E Fuller (born 1972) is a British artist best known for his renditions of British fauna, rendered faithfully in oils, acrylic and bronze. The RSPCA and the National Trust are among his British customers. He also travels the world to study birds and animals in their natural habitat and his paintings sell internationally. His lifelike paintings and sculpture are the result of months spent immersed in the natural habitat of his wild subjects.
A passionate conservationist, Fuller combines his art with work to preserve the animals and birds to which he owes his livelihood. He uses his paintings to raise funds for conservation and is a founding member of the barn owl conservation group Wolds Barn Owl Group near his home in North Yorkshire.
The artist also writes a monthly column in The Yorkshire Post and the Ryedale Gazette and Herald in which he shares his enthusiasm for all things wild.
His regular appearances on British television championing wild creatures near his home and gallery on the Yorkshire Wolds have earned him a reputation as an ambassador for the region's wildlife. As such he appeared on ITV's Calendar, Countryfile on April 12, 2011, BBC Look North and BBC The One Show on 16 January 2013.
In 2011 Fuller was given an award for bravery by the RSPCA after his quick action when he stumbled upon an armed gang of badger baiters and helped secure a successful conviction.
Born in 1972, Fuller moved to Great Givendale, where his father, Richard Fuller, an author and wildlife enthusiast, earned notability for wildlife conservation after winning the Silver Lapwing award for farm conservation.
In 2014, Fuller visited the Galápagos Islands and subsequently painted a series of Galapagos wildlife pieces. These were the focus of the summer exhibition at his gallery and then went on display at The Deep (aquarium) in Hull. He also did a series of school visits in Yorkshire with staff from the Galapagos Conservation Trust. 
In 2015, Fuller was visited and interviewed by Julian Clary in an episode of Nature Nuts with Julian Clary, a nature show on ITV.
