Prenatal care, also known as antenatal care is a type of preventive healthcare, with the goal of providing regular check-ups that allow doctors or midwives to treat and prevent potential health problems throughout the course of the pregnancy while promoting healthy lifestyles that benefit both mother and child. During check-ups, pregnant women will receive medical information over maternal physiological changes in pregnancy, biological changes, and prenatal nutrition including prenatal vitamins. Recommendations on management and healthy lifestyle changes are also made during regular check-ups. The availability of routine prenatal care, including prenatal screening and diagnosis, has played a part in reducing maternal death rates and miscarriages as well as birth defects, low birth weight, neonatal infections and other preventable health problems.
The World Health Organization (WHO) reported that in 2015 around 830 women died every day from problems in pregnancy and childbirth. Only 5 of the women who died lived in high income countries, the rest of the women lived in low income countries.
A study done took a look at the differences in preterm and low weight birth deliveries between Spanish and immigrant women to see how the difference of prenatal care received effected the mothers. The study was conducted between 1997 and 2008, looking at 21,708 women giving birth in a region of Spain. The results indicated that very preterm birth (VPTB) and very low birth weight (VLBW) were much more prevalent in immigrants than in the natives (Castelló et al., 2012). This study shows the importance of prenatal care and how prenatal care needs to become more universalized so that people of all origins can get proper care before pregnancy/birth (Castelló et al., 2012).
The WHO recommends that pregnant women should all receive four antenatal visits to spot and treat problems and give immunizations. Although antenatal care is important for improving the health of the mother and baby, many women do not receive four visits.
There are many ways of changing health systems to help women access antenatal care such as new health policies, educating health workers and health service re-organisation3. Community interventions to help people change their behavior can also play a part. Examples of these interventions are: media campaigns reaching many people, enabling communities to take control of their own health, informative-education-communication interventions or financial incentives. A review looking at these interventions found that one intervention helps improve the number of women receiving antenatal care. However interventions used together may reduce baby deaths in pregnancy and early life, lower numbers of low birth weight babies born and improve numbers of women receiving antenatal care.
Traditional prenatal care in high income countries generally consists of:
monthly visits during the first two trimesters (from week 1–28)
fortnightly visits from 28th week to 36th week of pregnancy
weekly visits after 36th week until delivery (delivery at week 38–42)
Assessment of parental needs and family dynamic
This traditional form of antenatal care has developed from the early 1900s and there is very little research to suggest it is the best way of giving antenatal care. Antenatal care can be costly and uses a lot of staff. The following paragraphs describe research looking at other forms of antenatal care which may reduce the burden on maternity services in all countries.
