A medical scribe is a person, or paraprofessional, who specializes in charting physician-patient encounters in real time, such as during medical examinations. Depending on which area of practice the scribe works in, the position may also be called clinical scribe, ER scribe or ED scribe (in the emergency department), or just scribe (when the context is implicit). A scribe is trained in health information management and the use of health information technology to support it. A scribe can work on-site (at a hospital or clinic) or remotely from a HIPAA-secure facility. Medical scribes who work at an off-site location are known as virtual medical scribes and normally work in clinical settings.
A medical scribe's primary duties are to follow a physician through his or her work day and chart patient encounters in real-time using a medical office's electronic health record (EHR) and existing templates. Medical scribes also generate referral letters for physicians, manage and sort medical documents within the EHR system, and assist with e-prescribing. Medical scribes can be thought of as data care managers, enabling physicians, medical assistants, and nurses to focus on patient in-take and care during clinic hours. Medical scribes, by handling data management tasks for physicians in real-time, free the physician to increase patient contact time, give more thought to complex cases, better manage patient flow through the department, and increase productivity to see more patients.
The introduction of electronic health records has revolutionized the practice of medicine. However, the complexity of some systems has resulted in providers spending more time documenting the encounter instead of speaking with and examining the patient. A tool which was intended to elevate some problems of clinical documentation has caused many problems for the very people who were supposed to benefit from the technology - the providers. As a result, providers are experiencing burnout and dissatisfaction.  An increasing body of research has shown the use of medical scribes is associated with improved overall physician productivity, cost- and time-savings, and patient satisfaction. An in-depth study conducted by The Vancouver Clinic in Vancouver, WA from 2011-2012 found that medical scribes improved the quality of clinical documentation and allowed doctors to see extra patients, while noting the risks associated with scribe turnover and doctors' unfamiliarity with the scribe concept. Notably, research has recommended that healthcare providers employ medical scribes to reduce time spent performing data entry and other administrative tasks, which can increase physician fatigue and dissatisfaction.
There is distinction between a medical scribe and a Certified Medical Scribe Specialist or a Certified Medical Scribe Apprentice, appropriately certified and credentialed through the American College of Medical Scribe Specialists. CMS recognizes appropriately credentialed and certified professionals in Physician/CMSS or Physician/CMSA teams. Personnel entering CEHRT must be certified if not the licensed clinician themselves. CMSS scribes are assisting clinicians in meeting national iniatives and goals, in addition to innovating the healthcare system through full scope of clinical informatics/medical assistive skill sets. All physicians attesting for Meaningful Use, now Advancing Care Information through MACRA, must be certified for clinical documentation audit compliance. Physicians and Mid-Levels for Practice Administration: "CMS has asked that each clinician/provider/practice retain a copy of the Specialist crosswalk and certification documentation in their files just as they would retain documentation outlining their individual approach and method, as well as staffing protocols for audit purposes.”
