HIV in pregnancy is the presence of the HIV virus in a woman while pregnant. There are concerns because women diagnosed with HIV/AIDS may transmit the infection to their child during pregnancy. The infection be transmitted to the infant during the pregnancy, childbirth, or breastfeeding. However, the risk of mother-to-child transmission of HIV may be reduced by the use of HIV medications known as antiretroviral therapy (ART). These medications may be used by women before, during, and after pregnancy. After delivery, children are also given the medication to reduce the risk of infection. Because HIV may be spread through breast milk, mothers with the infection are encouraged to avoid breastfeeding.
Infection with HIV/AIDS is not a contraindication to pregnancy. Women with the disease may choose to become pregnant if they desire, however, they are encouraged to talk with their doctors beforehand. Some women are unaware they have the disease until they become pregnant. In this case, they should begin antiretroviral therapy as soon as possible. With the appropriate treatment, the risk of mother-to-child infection can be reduced to below 1%. Without treatment, the risk of transmission is 15-45%.
There are approximately 1.4 million HIV positive women who become pregnant and contribute to more than 300,000 neonatal and fetal deaths each year. With the use of ART, transmission of HIV from the mother to child has decreased according to reports by the World Health Organization (WHO). In 2009, there were an estimated 400,000 children born with HIV and by 2013, there were 240,000. Countries in Southern Africa are worst affected by the HIV/AIDS pandemic. In 2010, 30% of all pregnancies in the region were affected by HIV. In 2011, HIV was responsible for 50% of the deaths for children below the age of 5. In the United States, fewer than 200 babies are born with HIV every year.
As of 2015, Cuba has become the first country in the world to eradicate mother-to-child transmission of HIV. In 2010, the WHO partnered with the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) to implement an initiative that would provide early prenatal care and HIV testing for all pregnant women in the country. For women who tested positive, ART was provided for both the mother and child, cesarean sections were performed, and alternatives to breastfeeding were provided. In implementing these measures, the country was successfully able to eradicate HIV transmission during pregnancy.
