A due-on-sale clause is a clause in a loan or promissory note that stipulates that the full balance of the loan may be called due (repaid in full) upon sale or transfer of ownership of the property used to secure the note. The lender has the right, but not the obligation, to call the note due in such a circumstance.
In real estate investing, the due-on-sale clause can be an impediment for a property owner who wishes to sell the property and have the buyer take over an existing loan rather than paying the loan off as part of the sale. Likewise, a due-on-sale clause would interfere with a seller's extension of financing to a buyer by using a wraparound mortgage, also called an "all-inclusive mortgage", "all-inclusive deed of trust", "all-inclusive trust deed", or "AITD." Any of these arrangements triggers the due-on-sale clause in the seller's existing mortgage and thus the lender may call the loan due. If a property with a due-on-sale clause in the mortgage loan is transferred and the loan is not paid off, the bank could call the loan and then foreclose on the property if the buyer is unable to immediately tender the entire remaining balance on the loan. How likely this is depends on how the real estate economy is doing. If the buyer continues to pay the loan payments when due, it is less likely that the bank would actually call the loan due but it is still the bank's choice.
In the early 1980s, with interest rates on new loans at 18%, banks frequently attempted to enforce due-on-sale clauses with respect to older loans that had been made at lower interest rates (especially those made prior to the 1973–75 recession and the ensuing stagflation), so they could retire those loans from their books, force buyers to obtain new loans to fund their transactions, and lend funds to them at higher interest rates. In the lending market of the 2010s, many observers believe that banks are not likely to enforce due-on-sale provisions unless they have another reason to call the loan due.
