Mental illness can be a consequence of miscarriage or early pregnancy loss. Even though women can develop long-term psychiatric symptoms after a miscarriage, acknowledging the potential of mental illness is not usually considered. A mental illness can develop in women who have experienced one or more miscarriages after the event or even years later.Some data suggest that men and women can be affected up to 15 years after the loss. Though recognized as a public health problem, studies investigating the mental health status of women following miscarriage are still lacking. Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) can develop in women who have experienced a miscarriage. Risks for developing PTSD after miscarriage include emotional pain, expressions of emotion, and low levels of social support. Even if relatively low levels of stress occur after the miscarriage, symptoms of PTSD including flashbacks, intrusive thoughts, dissociation and hyperarousal can later develop. Clinical depression also is associated with miscarriage. Past responses by clinicians have been to prescribe sedatives.
Recurring miscarriage may increase the incidence of intrusive thoughts in women and their partners.
Miscarriage has an emotional effect and can also lead to psychological disorders. One disorder that can develop is primary maternal preoccupation. This psychological trauma can develop as a response to early pregnancy loss. Anxiety can also develop as a result of a miscarriage. Women describe the medical treatment that they receive contributed their distress. Even if relatively low levels of stress occur after the miscarriage, symptoms of PTSD including flashbacks, dissociation and hyperarousal can later develop. Clinical depression also is associated with miscarriage.
Intrusive thoughts can develop after the loss. Panic disorder and obsessive thoughts may also develop as a response to a miscarriage. Men may experience pain and psychological effects but react by adopting “compensatory behaviours” such as increasing consumption of alcohol. Because men can consider their role to be supportive, they may not have their loss recognized.
