Female sex tourism is sex tourism by women who travel intending to engage in sexual activities with a sex worker. Female sex tourists may seek aspects of the sexual relationship not shared by their male counterpart, such as perceived romance and intimacy. Women – especially wealthy, single, older white women – plan their holidays to have romance and sex with a companion who knows how to make them feel special and give them attention. The prevalence of female sex tourism is significantly lower than male sex tourism.
Female sex tourism occurs in diverse regions of the world. The demographics of female sex tourism vary by destination, but in general female sex tourists are usually classified as women from a developed country, who travel to less developed countries in search of romance or sexual outlets.
Female sex tourists can be grouped into three types:
Traditional sex tourists, who have similar characteristics and motives as male sex tourists.
Situational sex tourists, who do not intentionally put themselves in a sex tourist position, but find themselves involved in a sexual encounter with local men. Situational sex tourists may fall into the category of either being businesswomen, students, women in overseas conferences or other women who have different agendas that are non-sexual.
Romance tourists, who plan to fulfil their travel with romantic experiences that they cannot experience in their native country.
Within the realm of female sex tourism, male sex workers are vital for the satisfaction of these women, whether physical or emotional. Without the employment of local sex workers, sex tourism for both men and women would not exist. Sex tourism is becoming a global phenomenon. With this movement of different populations to different countries, problems concerning health increase, especially ailments involving sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and HIV/AIDS. Women involved with sex tourism do not find themselves using barrier contraceptives during the majority of their visit, leaving them unprotected against STIs.
