A "self-made man" (later expanded to include "self-made women") is a classic phrase first coined on February 2, 1832 by United States senator Henry Clay who referred to the self-made man in the United States senate, to describe individuals in the manufacturing sector whose success lay within the individuals themselves, not with outside conditions. Benjamin Franklin, one of the Founding Fathers of the United States, has been described as the greatest exemplar of the self-made man. Inspired by Franklin's autobiography, Frederick Douglass developed the concept of the self-made man in a series of lectures that spanned decades starting in 1859. Originally, the term referred to an individual who arises from a poor or otherwise disadvantaged background to eminence in financial, political or other areas by nurturing qualities, such as perseverance, hard work, and ingenuity, as opposed to achieving these goals through inherited fortune, family connections, or other privileges. By the mid-1950s, success in the United States generally implied "business success."
The biographical history of the United States contains many figures who overcame obstacles, such as extreme poverty, through will power and a sense of purpose. Significant historical figures described as self-made men include George Washington, Alexander Hamilton, Andrew Jackson, Henry Clay Frick, E. H. Harriman, Abraham Lincoln, Andrew Johnson, Henry Wilson, Daniel Webster, Edward Everett, Rufus Choate, P. T. Barnum, Booker T. Washington, Thomas Edison, John D. Rockefeller, Andrew Carnegie, Henry Ford, Ronald Reagan, and Bill Clinton.
According to the 2017 "World Ultra Wealth Report" by research company Wealth-X, self-made individuals, mainly men, have "largely driven" global "wealth creation" from 1997 through 2017. The report noted that while there are an increasing number of women who are designated as high net worth, most inherited their wealth and only a small percentage sourced their wealth as self-made.
In the intellectual and cultural history of the United States, the idea of the self-made man as an archetype or cultural ideal has been criticized by some as being a myth or a cult.
