Wired communication refers to the transmission of data over a wire-based communication technology. Examples include telephone networks, cable television or internet access, and fiber-optic communication. Also waveguide (electromagnetism), used for high-power applications, is considered as wired line. Local telephone networks often form the basis for wired communications that are used by both residential and business customers in the area. Most of the networks today rely on the use of fiber-optic communication technology as a means of providing clear signaling for both inbound and outbound transmissions. Fiber optics are capable of accommodating far more signals than the older copper wiring used in generations past, while still maintaining the integrity of the signal over longer distances.
Alternatively, communication technologies that don't rely on wires to transmit information (voice or data) are considered wireless.
The legal definition of most, if not all, wireless technologies today or "apparatus, and services (among other things, the receipt, forwarding, and delivery of communications) incidental to such transmission" are a wire communication as defined in the Communications act of 1934 in 47 U.S.C. §153 ¶(59). This makes everything online today and all wireless phones a use of wire communications by law whether a physical connection to wire is visible or is not. The Communications act of 1934 created the Federal Communications Commission to replace the Federal Radio Commission. If there were no real wired communications today, there would be no online and there would be no mobile phones or nothing wireless except satellite communications.
In general, wired communications are considered to be the most stable of all types of communications services. They are relatively impervious to adverse weather conditions when compared to wireless solutions. With some forms of wired services, the strength and speed of the transmission is superior to other solutions, such as satellite or microwave transmissions. These characteristics have allowed wired communications to remain popular, even as wireless solutions have continued to advance.
