In commerce, customer experience (CX) is the product of an interaction between an organization and a customer over the duration of their relationship. This interaction is made up of three parts: the customer journey, the brand touchpoints the customer interacts with, and the environments the customer experiences (including digital environment) during their experience. A good customer experience means that the individual's experience during all points of contact matches the individual's expectations. Gartner asserts the importance of managing the customer's experience.
Customer experience implies customer involvement at different levels – such as rational, emotional, sensorial, physical, and spiritual. Customers respond diversely to direct and indirect contact with a company. Direct contact usually occurs when the purchase or use is initiated by the customer. Indirect contact often involves advertising, news reports, unplanned encounters with sales representatives, word-of-mouth recommendations or criticisms.
Customer experience can be defined as the internal and personal responses of the customers that might be line with the company either directly or indirectly. Creating direct relationships in the place where customers buy, use and receive services by a business intended for customers such as instore or face to face contact with the customer which could be seen through interacting with the customer through the retail staff. We then have indirect relationships which can take the form of unexpected interactions through a company's product representative, certain services or brands and positive recommendations – or it could even take the form of "criticism, advertising, news, reports" and many more along that line.
Customer experience is created by the contribution of not only the customers' values but also by the contribution of the company providing the experience.
All of the events experienced by customers before and after a purchase are part of the customer experience. When a customer is undertaking the experience it is seen as personal and unique, as well as it provides stimulation to all sensory, emotional, rational and physical aspects of which can help to create a memorable experience for the consumer of which they will never forget. The concept of customer experience can be investigated in various types of organizations and industries throughout the world, but many studies on customer experience in the retail industry have been developed. In the retail industry, both company and customers play a big role in creating a customer experience.
