Television Broadcasts Limited, commonly known as TVB, was the first wireless commercial television station in Hong Kong and commenced broadcasting on 19 November 1967. The company was registered on 26 July 1965 and was co-founded by Sir Run Run Shaw who was chairman from 1980 to 2011. It has a staff of about 4,200 and TVB's headquarters (Hong Kong TVB City) is Asia's largest commercial television production centre. TVB currently runs five free-to-air television channels in Hong Kong and is one of the largest commercial Chinese programme producers in the world.
When TVB first began broadcasting it was commonly known as "Wireless Television" (無綫電視 Cantonese: mou4 sin3 din6 si6) in Chinese to distinguish it from the then cable television broadcaster, Rediffusion Television (麗的呼聲), which later became ATV. It is still usually referred to with that name, although ATV later switched to "wireless" broadcasting as well and now there are other "wireless" broadcasters in Hong Kong.
TVB currently operates five free channels in Hong Kong: TVB Jade (Cantonese) and TVB Pearl (English) are TVB's flagship television channels, and both are available on analogue and digital. J2, TVB News Channel and TVB Finance Channel are digital-only channels.
TVB also operates myTV SUPER as its pay-tv service, and has a package of channels known as TVB Network Vision, which are carried by PCCW's NowTV service.
TVB reaches out to the Overseas Chinese communities. Its productions are available in Mainland China, Taiwan, Macau, the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, Ireland, New Zealand, Thailand, Malaysia, and Singapore, among others, on channels such as TVB's own TVB-Europe [1] subscription satellite service. In Taiwan, TVB operates through its TVBS subsidiary.
Many of Hong Kong's film and pop stars started their careers at the station through drama series produced by TVB. Special TVB events such as the annual TVB Anniversary Celebration are broadcast to planetary audience. TVB also runs talent programmes such as the annual Miss Hong Kong and Miss Chinese International beauty pageants. Successful contestants may be offered TVB's contracts and represent Hong Kong to take part at world-class beauty contests, including the Miss World Pageant.
