The Jeep Trailhawk is a mid-size concept SUV unveiled at the 2007 North American International Auto Show.
Combining traditional off-road features with refined on-road cruising capabilities, Jeep builds on the new Wrangler Unlimited platform to bring us a new take on open-air motoring. Removable tinted glass panels cover the first- and second-row seats, over the cargo compartment and swing-up backlight. When removed, passengers enjoy the same open-air experience found in traditional soft top Jeeps. A 3.0-liter BLUETEC 215 hp (160 kW) 376 lb·ft (510 N·m) V6 diesel powers the Trailhawk.
The four-passenger interior is dominated by two major design elements—the cross-car instrument panel (I/P) form and a full-length central spine which forms the floor console. The AC outlets, center stack compass/inclinometer, and the dimensional, double-deck "biplane" gauges are housed in circular casings having the appearance of machined aluminum, with detailing matching headlamp surrounds. The two-tone leather-wrapped aluminum steering wheel features vertical individual switches for lights and speed control.
"The key to the look of the Trailhawk," said Nick Vardis, Principal Exterior Designer, "is the vehicle's distinctive proportions, due in part to its 116-inch (2,900 mm) wheelbase. The dash-to-front-axle dimension is dramatically long, giving the vehicle a sense of forward motion, while the front and rear overhangs are tight and abbreviated."
Vardis said the body side is muscular and broad-shouldered, with the sheet metal pulled into shape, much like a drawn arrow in the bow of a skilled archer. Even the pillars are pulled back. The forward motion of the body is further accented by the drive of the raising beltline.
With its 116-inch (2,900 mm) long wheelbase, long hood and short overhangs, the Trailhawk almost looks like a grand touring machine. Even with its 34-inch tires and bulging fenders, the Trailhawk is much, much sleeker than any other Jeep in existence. It almost looks as if the Trailhawk was designed to go after the soft-roader market currently occupied by vehicles like the Infiniti Q70 and Ford Edge.
