The Global Hunger Index (GHI) is a multidimensional statistical tool used to describe the state of countries’ hunger situation. The GHI measures progress and failures in the global fight against hunger. The GHI is updated once a year.
The Index was adopted and further developed by the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), and was first published in 2006 with the Welthungerhilfe, a German non-profit organization (NPO). Since 2007, the Irish NGO Concern Worldwide joined the group as co-publisher.
The 2017 Global Hunger Index (GHI) report—the twelfth in an annual series—presents a multidimensional measure of national, regional, and global hunger. It shows that the world has made progress in reducing hunger since 2000, but that the progress has been uneven, and may now be threatened. This year's report finds several countries have higher hunger levels in 2017 than they did in 2008, indicating that progress in reducing hunger over recent decades is reversing more recently in some places.
In addition to the ranking, the Global Hunger Index report every year focuses on a main topic: in 2017 the thematic focus is on inequality and hunger.
Topics of previous years included:
Early childhood undernutrition among children younger than the age of two (2010).
Rising and more volatile food prices of the recent years and the effects these changes have on hunger and malnutrition in 2011.
In 2012: Achieving food security and sustainable use of natural resources, when the natural sources of food become increasingly scarcer.
In 2013, the thematic focus was on the strengthening of resilience at the community level against under- and malnutrition.
In 2014, the thematic focus was on hidden hunger, a form of undernutrition characterized by micronutrient deficiencies.
In 2015, the thematic focus was on armed conflict and its relation to hunger.
In 2016, the thematic focus was on reaching the UN Sustainable Development Goal of zero hunger by 2030.
In addition to the yearly GHI, the Hunger Index for the States of India (ISHI) was published in 2008 and the Sub-National Hunger Index for Ethiopia was published in 2009.
India tops world hunger list with 194 million people. That's more than the combined population of Australia, Canada, United Kingdom and France. However, India's population is more than the combined population of all European countries, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and United states.
An interactive map allows users to visualize the data for different years and zoom into specific regions or countries.
