The June 2012 Greek legislative election was held in Greece on Sunday, 17 June, to elect all 300 members to the Hellenic Parliament in accordance with the constitution, after all attempts to form a new government failed following the May election. If all attempts to form a new government fails, the constitution directs the president to dissolve a newly elected parliament, and then to call for new parliamentary elections within 30 days of the dissolution. The president announced at 16 May the date for the new election, and signed the formal decrete to dissolve the parliament and call for the election at 19 May.
The election result featured New Democracy as the largest party, with 30% of the votes and 129 seats (including the 50 extra seats for coming first). The second party was the Coalition of the Radical Left (SYRIZA) with 27% of the votes and 71 seats. The third party was the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK) with 12% of the votes and 33 seats. The other parties that won seats were: Independent Greeks (ANEL) with 20 seats, Golden Dawn (XA) with 18 seats, Democratic Left (DIMAR) with 17 seats, and Communist Party of Greece (KKE) with 12 seats.
None of the parties achieved the 151 seats needed for an overall majority. As outlined by the constitution, the largest party ND led the first negotiations to try and form a new government. ND invited all elected parties, except the ultranationalist party Golden Dawn (XA), to participate in a unity government that would respect the existing bailout agreement Greece signed and ratified in February 2012, but as the highest priority should attempt to renegotiate the austerity terms of the agreement, asking the main creditors (EU, ECB and IMF) to accept milder terms and increase their amount of bailout funding to Greece. On 20 June, a new unity government comprising ND, PASOK and DIMAR was formed for a planned 4-year term, with Antonis Samaras appointed to be the new Prime Minister. The new cabinet was dominated by lawmakers from ND but also included a significant number of technocrats, among them two ministers (Justice, Administrative Reform) nominated by DIMAR. The other coalition participant, PASOK, opted not to participate with leading party cadres in the government.
