Tax evasion and corruption is a problem in Greece. Tax evasion was described by Greek politicians as "a national sport"—with up to €30 billion per year going uncollected, according to a 2012 estimate. A 2016 estimate indicated that between €11 billion and €16 billion euros per annum were not collectable. Other significant amounts were uncollected due to VAT (sales tax) fraud and smuggling.
Political corruption is acknowledged as a significant problem by many observers, but some believe its size has been overstated by international media. According to the National Integrity System Assessment 2012 report by Transparency International-Greece, the problem of corruption in Greece is the confluence of many factors, including weak enforcement of the law, a lack of audits, the absence of codes of conduct, the non-transparency of government activities, an inefficient bureaucracy, government impunity and broad discretionary powers, and a lack of public awareness.
According to Transparency International's Global Corruption Barometer 2013, 90% of surveyed households consider political parties to be corrupt or extremely corrupt—ranking as the most corrupt institution in Greece. Furthermore, 39% of the surveyed households believe that the level of corruption has increased a lot, and 46% of surveyed households find government efforts in the fight against corruption to be very ineffective.
The government’s corruption efforts have not been evaluated as effective, according to several sources, which has been attributed to lax enforcement of anti-corruption legislation and the ineffectiveness of anti-corruption agencies. Anti-corruption agencies have been hindered by excessive political influence and continuous replacement of staff. Recent involvement of high-ranking public officials in corruption cases has been reported in the media.
According to 2016 results of Corruption Perception Index of Transparency International, Greece ranks 69th place out of 176 countries. In other words, 68 countries have a lower perceived level of corruption.
