Darnell L. Moore (January 24, 1976 Camden, New Jersey) is an American writer and activist whose work is informed by anti-racist, feminist, queer of color, and anti-colonial thought and advocacy. Darnell's essays, social commentary, poetry, and interviews have appeared in various national and international media venues, including the Feminist Wire, Ebony magazine, and The Huffington Post. He was appointed by Mayor Cory Booker as inaugural Chair of the city of Newark, New Jersey LGBT Concerns Advisory Commission, the first of its kind in the state of New Jersey. He is the co-chair, with Beryl Satter, of the groundbreaking Queer Newark Oral History project—an archival project that seeks to chronicle the multifaceted lives of LGBTQ Newarkers and their allies.
Moore's scholarship focuses broadly on Black Theology and Black Christian thought that is inclusive of queer subjectivities. He has published peer-reviewed essays that attempt to queer Black Christian thought in Black Theology: An International Journal, Theology & Sexuality, and Pneuma: The Journal of the Society for Pentecostal Studies. He was a member of the Beyond Apologetics colloquium organized by theologians Joretta Marshall and Duane Bidwell, which brought together scholars/pastors centered on the themes of sexual identity, pastoral theology, and pastoral practice. Moore was also a selected participant in the 2012 Seminar on Debates on Religion and Sexuality convened by theologian Mark Jordan at Harvard Divinity School.
He is an Editorial Collective Member of the Feminist Wire and co-author, with former NFL player Wade Davis, II, of a bi-monthly column on The Huffington Post Gay Voices focused on black manhood and queer politics titled "Tongues Untied." Moore has served appointments as a visiting fellow at Yale Divinity School and a visiting scholar at the Center for the Study of Gender and Sexuality at New York University and has served as a Lecturer at Rutgers University and The City College of New York (CUNY). Moore is a board member of the Center for Lesbian and Gay Studies at CUNY and The Tobago Center for Study and Practice of Indigenous Spirituality. He has interviewed Frank Mugisha, Steve Harper, Cheryl Clarke (Lambda Literary), Amiri Baraka and Mayor Cory Booker. Moore is part of the Audre Lorde Human Rights Speaker Series at The Sexuality, Gender & Human Rights Program at Harvard Kennedy School, CARR Center for Human RIghts Policy
