Women in the Young Lords, a Puerto Rican nationalist group founded in the United States, advocated for gender equality and challenged male authority in the organization from 1969-1976. They wrote articles critiquing sexist and patriarchal structures and demanded a series of reproductive rights that included access to abortion and an end to forced sterilization. In November of 1970, women consisted of roughly forty percent of the group’s membership and were between the ages of 13 and 28. Despite their considerable presence in the YLP, female members were consistently overlooked to occupy high-ranking leadership positions. However, in 1970 Denise Oliver-Vélez was appointed as Minister of Economic Development and became the highest ranking woman in the party.
Women in the Young Lords made significant contributions to the daily maintenance of the organization. They led free breakfast programs for children in local churches as well as educational workshops for community members. Maintaining their commitment to feminism and female liberation, they worked on the Young Lords Party Position Paper on Women, which explicitly linked traditional family structures as initial sites of female oppression. The Young Lords Party Position Paper on Women was later included in The Young Lords: A Reader (2010), edited by Darrel Enck-Wanzer (see external links below for the full text of that book). The paper would go on to cement the Young Lords as a main organization in the fight for gender equality at the time.
Iris Morales, a former Young Lord and grassroots organizer, has worked to preserve the legacy of women in the party today. In 1994, she directed a documentary ¡Palante, Siempre Palante!, chronicling the life of the Young Lords from its inception in 1969 to its fragmentation and ultimate demise in 1976. Her role in documenting the history of the party and centering women throughout her work highlights another instance of female leadership in the Puerto Rican nationalist organization to this day.
