5th generation mobile networks or 5th generation wireless systems, abbreviated 5G, are the proposed next telecommunications standards beyond the current 4G/IMT-Advanced standards, operating in the millimeter wave bands (28, 38, and 60 GHz).
5G planning aims at higher capacity than current 4G, allowing a higher density of mobile broadband users, and supporting device-to-device, more reliable, and massive machine communications. 5G research and development also aims at lower latency than 4G equipment and lower battery consumption, for better implementation of the Internet of things. There is currently no standard for 5G deployments.
The Next Generation Mobile Networks defines the following requirements that a 5G standard should fulfill:
Data rates of tens of megabits per second for tens of thousands of users
Data rates of 100 megabits per second for metropolitan areas
1 Gb per second simultaneously to many workers on the same office floor
Several hundreds of thousands of simultaneous connections for wireless sensors
Spectral efficiency significantly enhanced compared to 4G
Coverage improved
Signaling efficiency enhanced
Latency reduced significantly compared to LTE.
In addition to providing simply faster speeds, they predict that 5G networks also will need to meet new use cases, such as the Internet of Things (internet connected devices), as well as broadcast-like services and lifeline communication in times of natural disaster. Carriers, chipmakers, OEMS and OSATs, such as Advanced Semiconductor Engineering (ASE) and Amkor Technology, Inc., have been preparing for this next-generation (5G) wireless standard, as mobile systems and base stations will require new and faster application processors, basebands and RF devices.
Although updated standards that define capabilities beyond those defined in the current 4G standards are under consideration, those new capabilities have been grouped under the current ITU-T 4G standards. The U.S. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) approved the spectrum for 5G, including the 28 GHz, 37 GHz and 39 GHz bands, on 14 July 2016.
As of 2017, development of 5G is being led by several companies, including Samsung, Intel, Nokia, Ericsson, Huawei, and others.
