The Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology, (POST) is the Parliament of the United Kingdom's in-house source of independent, balanced and accessible analysis of public policy issues related to science and technology. POST (rather distinctively) serves BOTH Houses of Parliament (the House of Commons and equally the House of Lords) as a joint establishment, through output that is apolitical and of widely acclaimed value to Parliamentarians of all parties. Thorough quality-control, which POST has pioneered, ensures that MPs and Peers can have confidence in its analyses should they wish to cite them in debate. These principles are reflected in the structure of POST’s Board with members from the Commons and Lords together with distinguished scientists and engineers from the wider world.
POST has always been a pioneering institution at the UK Parliament, though at the cost of some negative reaction - not in any way from Members of either House but especially from the administrative services of both Houses.
For example, POST had a web site for several years before the UK Parliament ever considered such a "revolutionary" idea and earned some opprobrium from the administration of Parliament for daring to embrace such a concept.
It also pioneered, first on its own, but later with increasing support from some parliamentary committees, the relevant use of on-line consultations for parliamentary inquiries.
At the time, the administrative authorities of both Houses regarded this approach to engagement as inappropriate - only within a few years to embrace it themselves (perhaps rather reluctantly) in the face of its obvious value.
The choice of the word "of" rather than "for" in the office's title was a formal recognition of a fundamental consideration.
POST was not, in any way, to be a body promoting special interests of the science and technology community, particularly funding levels. Rather it was to provide analysis and interpretation of issues, current and prospective, with a significant scientific or technological dimension. POST was not expected to make recommendations for any specific policy but to set out the choices in terms of policy options that were available to address any particular issue.
