Multi Commodity Exchange of India Ltd (MCX) (BSE: 534091) is an independent commodity exchange based in India. It was established in 2003 and is based in Mumbai. It is India's largest commodity futures exchange where the clearance and settlements of the exchange happens and the turnover of the exchange for quarter ended September 2017 was 26.08 trillion rupees. MCX offers futures trading in bullion, non-ferrous metals, energy, and a number of agricultural commodities (mentha oil, cardamom, crude palm oil, cotton and others).
In 2016, MCX was seventh among the global commodity bourses in terms of the number of futures contracts traded, the latest yearly data from Futures Industry Association (FIA) showed.
In February 2012, MCX had come out with a public issue of 6,427,378 Equity Shares of Rs. 10 face value in price band of Rs. 860 to Rs. 1032 per equity share to raise around $134 million. It was the first ever IPO by an Indian exchange and made MCX India’s only publicly listed exchange.
From September 28, 2015, MCX is being regulated by the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI). Earlier MCX was regulated by the Forward Markets Commission (FMC), which got merged with the SEBI on September 28, 2015.
Multi-Commodity Exchange appointed of Mrugank Paranjape as MD & CEO of the exchange on February 29, 2016 for a period of three years. Mrugank Paranjape has earlier working with Deutsche Bank for last 14 years. Last he was heading DB Center of the bank.
Commodities traded include -
Metal - Aluminium, Aluminium Mini, Copper, Copper Mini, Lead, Lead Mini, Nickel, Nickel Mini, Zinc, Zinc Mini.
Bullion - Gold, Gold Mini, Gold Guinea, Gold Petal, Gold Petal ( New Delhi), Gold Global, Silver, Silver Mini, Silver Micro, Silver 1000.
Agro Commodities - Cardamom, Cotton, Crude Palm Oil, Kapas, Mentha Oil, Castorseed, RBD Palmolien , Black Pepper.
Energy - Brent Crude Oil, Crude Oil, Crude Oil Mini, Natural Gas.
Multi Commodity Exchange of India provides live feeds for all traded commodities and these are published on various websites like MoneyControl.com, Economictimes.Indiatimes.com, McxIndia.info
