The single-window system is a trade facilitation idea. As such, the implementation of a single window system enables international (cross-border) traders to submit regulatory documents at a single location and/or single entity. Such documents are typically customs declarations, applications for import/export permits, and other supporting documents such as certificates of origin and trading invoices.
The main value proposition for having a single window for a country or economy is to increase the efficiency through time and cost savings for traders in their dealings with government authorities for obtaining the relevant clearance and permit(s) for moving cargoes across national or economic borders. In a traditional pre-single-window environment, traders may have had to contend with visits and dealings with multiple government agencies in multiple locations to obtain the necessary papers, permits, and clearances to complete their import or export processes.
A common definition of the term "single window" is:

"A facility that allows parties involved in trade and transport to lodge standardized information and documents with a single entry point to fulfill all import, export, and transit-related regulatory requirements. If information is electronic then individual data elements should only be submitted once."[1]

The concept is recognised and promoted by several world organisations that are concerned with trade facilitation. Amongst these are the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) and its Centre for Trade Facilitation and Electronic Business (UN/CEFACT), World Customs Organisation (WCO), the United Nations Network of Experts for Paperless Trade and Transport in Asia and the Pacific (UNNExT), SITPRO Limited of the United Kingdom and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
The diagram below illustrates an example of an implementation of a Single Window system within a country or economy.

There are so many actors and procedures and the time and cost for trade international. The reason why trade international need that relatively more than domestic trade, is needs for the inevitable controls of cross border regulatory Agencies(CBRAs). This inevitable various controls can be carried out through Single Window supporting by information technology, and optimized process. You can understand Single Window's Benefits from below two diagrams, which one is about before Single Window, and the other one is about after Single Window.
 


